An interplanetary trader walks into a space station bazaar with a little ball of fur that he'll sell unsuspecting customers for ten Credits a head. What is a “Credit,” and how can it work in an interstellar environment where you need warp drive to get anywhere in any reasonable amount of time? The space station doesn't have an ATM. There's not a purse in sight. So, how do people pay for things? It would be fair to assume that the Federation Credit is a form of digital currency that is designed for interstellar trade.
In the 21st century, a form of digital currency that could work with a few improvements already exists. Cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin can provide a secure and convenient medium of exchange that our theoretical interplanetary traders can handily carry on a small tablet on their belts. Astronomically themed cryptocurrencies like Marscoin, Earthcoin, Solarcoin and Orbitcoin already exist and could be refined to become currencies that are actually used in an environment where nobody will want to carry a purse or haul bulky physical money like gold, silver and paper bills any long distance.
Cryptocurrencies can work for an interplanetary economy in these five ways:
Cryptocurrencies can provide fast, secure settlements limited only by the laws of physics – and even that can be gotten around with some Information Technology smarts.
Cryptocurrencies can operate cheaply and quickly in economic environments that banks, Paypal and Western Union charge high fees to serve or won't touch.
Cryptocurrencies make use of the Blockchain ledger, which stores and secures transaction data in ways that could make attempts to tamper more expensive than it's worth.
Cryptocurrencies are uniquely designed to reward the production and deployment of resources.
Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain apps can provide common financial system standards that any space colony can use with a low barrier to entry.
Cryptocurrencies shouldn't be seen as a solution looking for a problem. Rather, they should be seen as something that showed up at a time when we can still resolve any technical issues that might limit cryptocurrencies and Blockchain-based apps before getting serious about interplanetary trade. I might frequently speak as if these issues have already been resolved and they're actually being used for trade between colonies. This is for the sake of visualizing what trade could look like in an environment where two or more partners in a trading coalition might not particularly trust one another and nobody trusts a centralized authority. They're not going to want a financial system that is overly centralized for the same reasons that they won't want a powerful “federal” government that refuses to comprehend their needs. Who needs a system that might forbid a transaction without making an attempt to understand that they're just buying an oxygen generator?
However, they may like the idea of decentralized currencies that they can use at the cost of providing their share of the computing resources needed to maintain the system. It's technical enough that a group of trading partners may hire some Blockchain experts to keep a general eye on things, but users won't particularly have to know what a Blockchain is to make use of systems based on it. This is not just a pipe dream when writers for Bitcoin.com can write articles titled , “Do You Think They'll Use U.S. Dollars On Mars?”i (Short answer: Not likely.) Cryptocurrency and Blockchain insider are starting to notice that the 21st-century version of the Space Race is starting to heat up, and aerospace professionals are starting to notice that Bitcoin exists. Even Paypal co-founder and SpaceX CEO Elon Musk admitted after ignoring Bitcoin for a while, “Bitcoin is a good thing.” So the partnership between Blockchain entrepreneurs and aerospace professionals could be the start of an era in which future space colonies use cryptocurrencies and the Blockchain to facilitate future trade.

iGil-Pulgar, 	Julio. "Do You Think They'll Use the US Dollar on Mars?" 	Bitcoin News. Bitcoin News, 14 Mar. 2017. Web. 12 Apr. 2017. 	<https://news.bitcoin.com/do-you-think-theyll-use-the-us-dollar-on-mars/>
$1.00 Tip
  
Chapter 1: What Are Cryptocurrencies, Anyway?
 

There have been digital currencies like BitGold and digital payment systems like Paypal before. What makes cryptocurrencies so special? In fact, they aren't really special except for two things. First, literally anyone can use them without needing a photo ID or a bank account. If you can copy-and-paste a string of letters and numbers or scan a QR code, you can use cryptocurrencies. You could think of them as a relatively anonymous or pseudonymous form of digital cash, if you like.
Second, most cryptocurrencies are secured using a cryptographic algorithm of some sort. Bitcoin, the original and best known cryptocurrency, makes use of the SHA-256 algorithm, which is regarded as secure but inefficient. Litecoin makes use of the less resource-extensive Scrypt algorithm. Solving these cryptographic algorithms reward the owners of mining rigs with newly minted currency, as well as granting mining fees when transactions are processed and relayed. That's why they're called “cryptographic currencies,” which is abbreviated to cryptocurrencies.
The process of solving the cryptographic function is referred to as mining in the cryptocurrency community. Due to the inefficient nature of most cryptographic algorithms, providing the processing power needed to secure a cryptocurrency requires specialized hardware called mining rigs. It's usually not recommended to mine Bitcoin on a laptop or tablet. The SHA-256 algorithm will chew its way through the processor without rewarding its owner with much. When cryptocurrency experts talk about difficulty levels, they're talking about the chance that a processor designed for the job will solve the hash first. The higher the difficulty level, the lower the chance that a normal processor used for computer-based consumer products will solve the algorithm quickly enough.
When a new user downloads a Bitcoin wallet, that user is downloading a client that connects to full nodes that store and relay data on the Bitcoin network. You could download a Bitcoin client right now without needing to verify your identity. You don't even need to verify your identity to earn Bitcoin when you can head over to one of the many Bitcoin freelancing sites to pick up some odd jobs. It's especially helpful if you can establish yourself on active forums like Bitcointalk, especially by asking any questions you have in the beginners' section.
Cryptocurrencies are designed to make use of a decentralized network. If a user can connect to just one node on the Bitcoin network, that user can send and receive Bitcoin. The Bitcoin network doesn't really care which node the user connects to as long as it's a valid one.
Who can run a full node on the Bitcoin network? Who can mine Bitcoin? Actually, you could if you are willing to make the investment in the appropriate hardware. A full node on the Bitcoin network could be hosted on a reliable server and mining rigs are readily available on eBay. For this reason, Bitcoin does not rely on any particular third party and does not have any single point of failure that could bring down the entire system if it fails.
This low barrier to entry could make cryptocurrencies attractive to colonies that are ready to join interplanetary trade routes and willing to make a modest initial investment. When cryptocurrencies catch on in this manner, colonists will never need to beg an uncaring banker for permission to engage in economic activity. They don't need to prove that they exist. They probably have more important things to think about than getting a photo ID. If the ability to establish their identity as unique individuals ever matters in any way, providing a fingerprint or showing their unique digital “voter ID” that they were assigned when they joined the colony should be the most they have to put up with.i
They will only need to establish that they are capable of operating a client by scanning a QR code or copy-and-pasting a randomized string of numbers and letters and tapping a few buttons on a touchscreen. With a little planning and coordination between colonies that wish to participate in trade, colonists will never face the plight of the 2 billion humans on Earth who cannot engage in the same economic activities that you probably take for granted because they cannot open a bank account.
Cryptocurrencies are set up to not care about whether you have a photo ID card or if you prefer not to 2% or 3% in fees every time you are a party in any given transaction. Future colonists won't even need to use one of the exchanges to get started. They just need to download the appropriate software and then figure out how to earn some cryptocurrencies. It would definitely be helpful to have an expert on hand to help them customize that software to suit their needs, but that isn't strictly necessary if they just want to try it at first.
Chapter 2: Some Problems With Using Cryptocurrencies For Interplanetary Commerce

It would be disingenuous to say that there won't be some problems to solve before cryptocurrencies are truly ready for interplanetary commerce. Cryptocurrencies aren't completely infallible, not even Bitcoin, and most Blockchain apps are still Version 1.X apps that may still have some bugs. This shouldn't discourage their use when colonists will already be accustomed to anticipating and solving problems before they have the chance to become fatal. These common problems can be anticipated and planned for by people who already understand the value of making careful preparations before they forge ahead.
The Node Problem

Running a full node on a cryptocurrency network does not come with any payoff for the owner of that node. For that reason, the owners of full nodes will sometimes turn the node off because they can't afford to run it anymore. This can lead to a more centralized system where one or a small handful of node owners control the system and decide among themselves which transactions are going to be relayed. If this happens to Bitcoin, that would be the effective end of Bitcoin as a decentralized system with a low barrier to entry and it will lose value as dedicated cryptocurrency users switch to one of the many altcoins. Bitcoin Core developer Jeff Garzik suggested a very Space Age solution to this problem by proposing a constellation of satellites in Earth orbit that function as full Bitcoin nodes.ii
Future space colonies that wish to participate in trade can take this one step farther by reserving server space to host nodes for the cryptocurrencies they wish to use. The technology behind Bitcoin can be scaled as needed if engineers are willing to keep up with the task. No, it does not have to be Bitcoin itself even though "Bitcoin" is usually used synonymously with "cryptocurrency" by people who have not dived into it very much. It just has to be one that colonies interested in trade can agree to use as a medium of exchange.iii



This gives them ready access to the data stored in that cryptocurrency's Blockchain ledger and ensures that the colonies that use a popular cryptocurrency can't be effectively blackmailed by a third party who controls the only means of relaying transactions on that cryptocurrency's network. Because these colonies are giving up storage for this purpose, they could be compensated with a system similar to Storj's proof-of-retrievability system in which they receive rewards for maintaining a node in a way that makes its data available to other nodes in the system.
Security Issues

Bitcoin currently faces two known security issues. The first is the risk that a malicious actor may run false nodes in what's known as a “Sybil attack.” These nodes would not relay transactions to the valid network, thus creating an effective denial-of-service attack for the clients that connect to the fake nodes. Chainalysis revealed this weakness in March 2015, when Bitcoin users caught it running fake nodes in what it called a test of a system that would have helped it provide regulatory compliance services. Chainalysis was not believed and the kindest thing that was said about this partial Sybil attack was that it was “rude.”iv
This problem might be detected first by users of a cryptocurrency client who notice that their transactions are not being confirmed. This means that their transactions are not being relayed to the rest of the network for some reason. A knowledgeable Blockchain expert can check the nodes they're connecting to so that he can make sure they're valid ones that are communicating with the rest of the network. If these nodes are being used as part of a Sybil attack, the Blockchain expert should know how to track them down and kick them off the network.
It would be preferable to have some method to prevent fake nodes from carrying out a Sybil attack and tricking clients into connecting to them in the first place. For this reason, a permissioned network in which nodes that can transmit data designed to prove that they have permission to validate transactions may not be a good idea. They might be transmitting the validation data, but they're also transmitting fake transaction data or no transaction data at all. As Leemon Baird, CEO of the distributed applications platform provider Swirlds said, it also gets back to the trust issue:
“[W]e need to avoid permissioned networks. "Permissioned" means you completely trust everyone who runs a node. The colonists and the earth dwellers might not trust each other.”v
Likewise, we might also have two or more colonies that don't entirely trust one another. The Cold War between the United States of America and the USSR was basically a massive competition between two different socioeconomic systems backed by two superpowers. The same might be true for a rivalry between two or more large colonies that compete for markets and for alliances with other colonies, with the occasional proxy war for good measure. Even if they agree to join the same coalition of trading partners, they won't want a system where everybody just trusts everybody else without a mechanism in place for disciplining colonies that violate the terms of the trade agreement, including the operation of a Sybil attack that fakes out the network by transmitting false data or no data at all.
The other issue is a direct attack on the Blockchain ledger system. Records on the Blockchain are regarded as very difficult, if not impossible, to modify without sending up all kinds of red flags because they are secured with a cryptographic hash and a timestamp. An attempt to alter existing records will result in what Blockchain experts call a fork – a new chain of records that has branched off from the original. The original version of the chain can be detected by comparing the hashing function and timestamps of records on both chains that were created beyond the point where the fork occurred.
There is one other way to attack the ledger for the purpose of altering it: scrap it and start over. Destroying all the nodes and clients on the Blockchain network, but saving the code it's based on, would have the effect of rebooting the Blockchain ledger. This hasn't been a problem for Bitcoin so far because there are hundreds of nodes and thousands of mining rigs run by independent operators around the world. It would be very difficult to destroy Bitcoin in this way without simultaneously shutting down the entire Internet.
This is one more reason why the application should be decentralized as much as is practical for the application's purpose. Each valid node can be regarded as a backup for every other valid node on the network. If a medium-sized bank has forty branches in fourteen cities and each branch is running a valid node (and contributing to the processing of transactions of which the bank is an interested party), the data will not be lost if three valid nodes suddenly go down.
Of course, this doesn't mean that somebody won't notice. What are the odds of three nodes in two cities going down at the exact same time? Is it an attack or just bad luck? Blockchain experts and server administrators can be dispatched to respond to the situation, starting by isolating the malfunctioning nodes from the rest of the network infrastructure. They can update one another's data later if it turns out to be just a freak happening and the data is still valid. For now, we're analyzing logs to find out what happened and resolving the issue. The important thing is that the network did not lose every single valid node in this scenario.
For this reason alone, the Blockchain ledger should be regarded as a means to create skilled jobs if you care about such things. Every single hacker, “black hat” or otherwise, will tell you that hacking is not like what you see in the movies. The number one weakness is usually people who may not think about the possible consequences when they give out information. Ultimately, the security of Bitcoin and Blockchain apps relies on people, starting with the highly trained and alert Blockchain security expert who can watch the Blockchain and the activity on nodes and clients for potential problems.
In terms of space colonization and future interplanetary trade, colonies should be encouraged to contribute resources for the purpose of maintaining the cryptocurrencies they choose to use. It's easy to isolate one misbehaving node without losing much more than a little processing power if that network is decentralized and each colony contributes to it. This also avoids the trap of leaving the job of processing and storing transaction data in the hands of a single entity that may not have the best interests of the entire coalition in mind.
The speed of light

This is an obvious problem for communication between planets, which means it will be an issue for nodes on our currencies' network, too. The nature of a decentralized cryptocurrency allows for the establishment of nodes on Earth, Mars, Ganymede and Pluto and the Blockchain won't care much until the limitations of radio communications create delays in the receipt and confirmation of new transaction data. The node on Ganymede might even be out of communication on a regular basis because Jupiter has a severe case of bloat and might block its transmissions sometimes. Most cryptocurrencies require confirmation from multiple nodes before a transaction can be considered valid. Traders won't want to wait hours or days for distant nodes to receive and confirm transactions.
This can be gotten around by establishing local sidechains that can temporarily store data until it's convenient to exchange data with the main Blockchain. A sidechain can consider a transaction valid if it has already been confirmed by the nearest node and pass that data along to other nodes on a schedule that allows it to get a clear line-of-sight transmission to the nearest nodes on other colonies. Then it wouldn't really matter if a large planet is in the way or if we haven't invented instantaneous communications between colonies that are far enough apart to make the speed of light an issue.
Another option is called the Lightning Network. It's a way for sidechains to rapidly swap data without relying on the existence of a unified, main Blockchain. Jameson Lopp of Coinometrics described the Lightning Network this way:
“It's … possible that a Lightning Network could be used to perform cross-chain atomic swaps between different planetary sidechains without even touching the parent Bitcoin blockchain.”vi
The Lightning Network could be adopted for use in Blockchain applications that will be used by multiple, far-flung colonies. Then we don't need to mess with having what amounts to a master server that needs to be constantly updated with data in an order and format that makes sense to the ledger.
The speed of light is also where Einsteinian physics gets more than a little annoying. According to Einstein's Special Theory of Relativity, a clock moving at 99.9% lightspeed will appear to run slower than a clock moving at 50% lightspeed to an observer who is standing still. In that case, will there be a way for nodes that are moving in relation to one another, causing time dilations and communications delays that are large enough to be annoying, to tell which transaction out of multiple records with the same time stamp came first? Leemon Baird says that his team is aware of the situation and has built elements that could solve this problem into the Swirlds platform:
“[W]e need to work despite Relativity. Suppose Alice spends a coin on earth, and Bob spends a coin on Mars at about the same time (less than 3 minutes apart). Someone might claim Alice was first. Someone else might claim Bob was first. Einstein's Special Theory of Relativity says they're both right!  Mars is always at least 3 light minutes from earth, so those events within 3 minutes of each other don't have a "true" order. We need some way to agree on what happened "first", when physics itself says there's no single, right answer. … It [a cryptocurrency designed to compensate for this problem] can put events in order, even when relativity says they don't have an order.”vii
So the observer who is not moving fast enough for Einsteinian physics to have much of an effect may still have a way to make sense of events even when the clock that is moving at 50% lightspeed says happened at a certain time even when the clock moving at 99.9% lightspeed disagrees. The best we can do in this situation is to have a way to compensate for the speed of light and its effects on Einsteinian physics in a way that neither Alice nor Bob have reason to complain.
The Adoption Issue

The creators of a new cryptocurrency will usually fight hard to get their cryptocurrency accepted on one or more of the major cryptocurrency exchanges. If they can gain a slot, they increase their odds of gaining the attention of traders on that exchange and it's one major step toward increased adoption of that cryptocurrency.
The problem here is that the creators of any particular cryptocurrency will usually dump their holdings and quit once they've gotten on their exchanges. They don't take the next step of courting merchants who might be interested in doing business with that currency. This has led to a perception that any cryptocurrency that hasn't already gained a fair amount of traction among ordinary users was created purely as a way to generate profit for its creator. There's even a term for cryptocurrencies that never really got very far because they were quickly abandoned by their creators – scamcoins. This should simply be regarded as a warning for any colony that wishes to use only its own currency or no currency at all. It might be able to list that currency on an effective foreign exchange, but the currency may not be taken very seriously and traders might choose to detour around what they see as an unprofitable stop on their trade route.
The situation isn't completely hopeless for a seemingly abandoned cryptocurrency, though. A former scamcoin called Europecoin viii is being rebooted. Auroracoin ix is in the middle of a resurgence after stalling out for a long time. Rebooting a previously abandoned cryptocurrency does require a considerable amount of dedication and an ability to convince a skeptical audience that the new team is really serious about making it work this time. Worth it? It can be if you're a former bagholder or a citizen of a particular country or continent who wants to offer an alternative to your particular government's fiat currency and the obvious candidate cryptocurrency already exists.
It can also be worth it if you wish to reboot an existing currency rather than completely start over with a new currency. Widespread adoption will be the primary obstacle for a future currency that has been created specifically for economic activity on another planet. Although Lennart Lopin's team of developers attempted to brand Marscoin as the “official” currency of Mars, he was honest that future Martians don't have to use it if they don't want to. It would be nice if they did, though, because as Lennart Lopin told me in an interview, he doesn't want Marscoin to be “a stupid, useless little cryptocurrency.”x A new currency, even one that has already been branded for Mars, means nothing if nobody ever touches it.



Sounds like a lot of trouble for a silly economic thing, doesn't it? It is sort of obvious that colonies won't be worried about the lubrication of interplanetary trade for quite a while yet. If they have a medium of exchange at all, it'll probably be something practical like ounces of water or watts or an extra serving of mashed potatoes – something that they might not mind trading extra work for because it's something that they can use.xi
When it's time to start thinking about what to do with all those surplus resources that a colony is producing, though, caravans of interplanetary traders will want a currency that's more portable than bulk items that impose a mass “penalty,” fill up cargo holds and might not sell quickly. Keep in mind that water masses a little over 3.785 kilograms per gallon.xii That's extra kilograms that traders will not want to haul away because it would cost them extra in fuel and reduce their profit margin.
Bits on a mobile device are much more portable, though. Future colonies who wish to participate in trade with one another will find that it's convenient in the long run to agree on a common medium of exchange. They just want one that works as well on Pluto and Ganymede as it does on Earth. The bottom line is that these problems can be gotten around if future experts that set up the infrastructure for interplanetary trade are aware of them and plan accordingly.
Chapter 3: Why Not Just Use Banks?

I know what you're probably thinking. With all the problems and highly technical solutions in the last chapter, why can't future space colonies just establish a common banking system? It would almost be easier than agreeing on which cryptocurrency to use. This is ignoring the idea that colonies that wish to participate in trade don't even need to limit themselves to just one cryptocurrency. An especially enterprising colony could use Earthcoin, Marscoin, Orbitcoin and Solarcoin with equal facility.
What are international financial systems, anyway? They're a common set of standards that have been agreed to by nations and organizations that wish to have the capacity to do business anywhere in the world. An American can travel to Europe without worrying about much more than exchange rates and where they can get the best deal when exchanging dollars to Euros. They're meant to move money across international borders. Under ideal circumstances, all people would be able to walk into a bank and open a checking account right now, fund it with their paychecks, and use it to do business with anybody, anywhere, at any time.
However, circumstances are not always ideal. Even ignoring the fact that Mars has no banks, estimates show that roughly two billion people were considered “unbanked” as of the end of 2014 – they don't have cheap or convenient access to financial services xiii. Maybe there's no bank within what we would consider walking distance where they live. Maybe the only way they can cash a check is to go to one of those check cashing venues, which are not banks and usually charge high fees for the convenience. Maybe they can't open a bank account because they have no way of establishing their identity, which is a common case for people who don't have a photo ID or even a birth certificate that they can show on demand.
It is fortunate, then, that you don't have to show a photo ID to download the cryptocurrency wallet of your choice. Sure, you sometimes need to be able to snap a high-resolution photo of your ID card to join one of the major Bitcoin exchanges, but that doesn't matter when you just want to use it as a form of digital cash and let someone else worry about converting Bitcoin to their local fiat currency. The whole point here is to enable buying and selling in environments where people might not have access to a “mainstream” financial system.
The simple fact here is that financial institutions can deny service or even shut down an account at any time, for any reason, and they get away with seizing people's hard-earned money without cause more often than they should. Many Bitcoin users made the switch from Paypal because Paypal is notorious for suspending accounts and seizing the money in them for no good reason. Paypal users practically have to hire an attorney to get that money back and most don't bother because an expensive lawsuit would cost them more than the few hundred bucks they had in that account. Yes, this is theft. No, you should not have to hire an attorney just to make sure you can access your legitimately earned money any time you want. (And no, I am not blaming Elon Musk here. I doubt he really has much to do with Paypal anymore.)
This is not a problem that is unique to Paypal. That 2 billion figure didn't just come out of nowhere. Paypal does not operate in all countries, but this may be partially a function of the fact that some countries either do not have a very well-developed financial infrastructure, or have one that leaves the impoverished out in the cold for no reason other than their lack of valuable tangible assets. If you don't have a bank within a day's walking distance, it is unlikely that you have a checking account. If you don't have a checking account, you can't confirm a Paypal account.
Of course, if you don't have a checking account, you probably have bigger worries than access to a Paypal account. Many large and/or international corporations won't talk to people who use cash for most of their transactions if they have a regular source of cash at all. Many Internet service providers have concluded that there's no market for access to the Internet in the most impoverished parts of the world. It isn't that people wouldn't want the Internet and the resulting connections to worldwide markets so they can have an easier time earning a living. It's that they don't have any up front cash to pay for access, so ISPs won't make the investment.
However, if a resident of one of these developing regions gets lucky and gains access to a cheap mobile device and a Wi-Fi connection, that person can download a cryptocurrency wallet without ever having to confirm it using a bank account or a photo ID. No uncaring banker can deny that person the ability to transact using Bitcoin in this case.
What this means for future space colonies is that they're going to have enough hassles without a banker deciding who can use financial services to do business and when, where and with whom they can do business. It will happen if the interplanetary financial infrastructure requires that traders and colonists go through a central bank to do business. Here's some examples of misbehavior on the part of international financial institutions for those of you who think that it can't happen. (I am not making these up!)
December 2011: Paypal suspended Regretsy's account after Regretsy raised funds to give Christmas gifts to children living in poverty. Paypal appeared to at least partially reverse its decision and made a donation after a social media backlash, but this is not a unique example of Paypal attempting to derail charitable fundraising efforts and seize the funds – and Paypal may even succeed in the cases that nobody ever hears about.xiv As Grinch-like as that was, this isn't even the worst example of abuse of the vulnerable by a financial institution…
January 2014: The World Bank's own internal Office of the Compliance Advisor releases the report of an investigation into human rights abuses carried out by a palm oil and food company it had provided funding for. This company had reportedly been complicit in the killings and forced evictions of small farmers in Honduras for the purpose of expanding palm oil plantations. The reactions to this news from human rights watchdogs highlighted the leverage that large, centralized financial organizations could have, either for or against human rights violations. A spokesperson for the German NGO Urgewald said of the matter:
 “The World Bank’s investments should improve the lives of local communities, or at the very least not endanger them. This report reveals that in the case of Dinant the World Bank failed massively on both fronts. The World Bank must halt all further disbursements to Dinant until decisive action is taken to ensure justice for crimes committed, and to prevent further abuses.”xv
 The World Bank's response to the matter was dubbed “disappointing” and “inadequate” by several watchdogs and this is not the only time or even the first time that the World Bank had been either complicit or directly active in human rights abuses. In fact, it has frequently been accused of contributing to atrocities around the world, including the forced relocation of minority ethnic groups in Ethiopia and abusive rehabilitation practices that included forced labor in southern Vietnam.xvi Some watchdogs who have researched the World Bank's history of lending practices have accused its founders and senior employees of a highly manipulative lending model that is specifically designed to encourage or enable human rights abuses.xvii 
As you can see, many financial organizations do not necessarily have the best interests of their customers in mind, will usually cover their own assets rather than grant an organization that is raising funds the benefit of the doubt, and can actively use their financial clout for less-than-noble ends. This is one of the biggest benefits of using a highly decentralized system like the one created by Satoshi Nakamoto. It slashes the chance that one entity or an elite group of entities can completely control the system in an effective monopoly or oligarchy and, thus, gain the ability to abuse its power without consequences – even if the consequences are limited to users jumping to another cryptocurrency if Bitcoin becomes too centralized to be useful for our purposes.
If one owner of a node and/or dedicated processing power for the network starts becoming the jerk that tries to dictate who can buy and sell on an equal footing with anybody else, it will be easy enough to simply pull the economic plug on that entity and redistribute the requirements of maintaining the network – and, yes, as we saw with the Chainalysis case mentioned in the last chapter, it is possible to tell which node that clients are connecting to and whether that node is behaving. Economic sanctions are a thing because no sane head of statexviii will ignore the economic consequences of misbehaving. The same can be true when dealing with a misbehaving trading partner or provider of financial services when a decentralized system is used.
International Remittances – Coming To A Space Colony Near You

Let's consider a country with an economy that is driven by the international remittance market. Families in the Philippines receive billions of dollars' worth of remittances every year from migrant workers that move to other countries to find work.xix Western Union charges up to US$4.99 to send US$200 from the U.S. to the Philippines, and that's if the sender wants to have the cash in the Filipino family's hand within minutes. This is an effective 2.495% fee just for the convenience of sending a couple of hundred bucks home quickly. If the sender wants to pay less in fees, the time it takes for the money to get into their hands can stretch to as long as four days.xx If the family is relying on that cash to pay rent, they'll have to fend off the landlord's threats of eviction for that amount of time. Who needs that?
If the worker can make use of Bitcoin, however, that worker can send any amount of money for only a few cents in mining fees and that digital cash will be in the family's hands by the end of the day in most cases. Some Philippine-based companies are even creating remittance services that take advantage of Bitcoin's main selling points: It's cheap, fast, secure, protects the rights of the recipient, and doesn't notice when Bitcoin being sent across international boundaries.xxi
This will be a boon for what could become the ultimate market for migrant labor and an “international” remittance market that is spreading throughout the solar system: brand-new and growing space colonies. Also interesting from an economic standpoint is the promise of booming industrial and mining industries based in outer space, especially around the asteroid belt. Imagine being able to sign up for a work contract with a mining company with rigs in the asteroid belt so you can provide for your family. You can insist on being paid in your cryptocurrency of choice and a reasonable recruiter will listen, or the several interplanetary-themed cryptocurrencies could simply become the standard in paying contract workers. This alone would bypass the need for “international” financial institutions that can get away with charging high fees and taking days to get the money into the hands of the recipients simply because those contract workers wouldn't have very many good options for sending money back to family members that need the full amount in a hurry.
Benefits To Interplanetary Corporations

Large international businesses know about the costs of moving money around. They're the ones who have to work with international financial institutions to keep the cash flowing. They might be able to negotiate better exchange rates than you could, but you can still be sure that it costs to send money across international borders. If you live in the U.S. and use TransferWisexxii, it could cost you $9.90 to send $1,000 to Europe. They even claim that this is a cost savings to you because some institutions can charge you up to 5% of what you send!
This obviously becomes a problem if you have expenses that include an international payroll. Besides having to deal with international employment regulations, your relationship with employees will go sour fast if they feel like they're being cheated. If their monthly salary is three thousand Euros, they're going to expect three thousand Euros and don't want to hear excuses about exchange rates or money transfer fees. However, if you can pay them in Bitcoin, things become a little more predictable because a monthly salary of 3.06 Bitcoinxxiii is pretty much the same thing on both sides of the deal.  
Think this can't be done? Keep in mind that Overstock gives its employees the option of receiving all or part of their pay in Bitcoin.xxiv Sure, it might make the accounting a little more complicated, but that's why the concept of an accounting department was invented. If it seems like a lot of trouble, just keep Bitcoin's low international transfer fees in the front of your mind, especially if your business routinely sends a lot of money across international borders.
The same idea applies when a corporation has a dozen mining rigs in the asteroid belt and a headquarters back on Earth. Earth might still be sulking from the successful revolt of its colonies by the time this even becomes an issue. Of course it's unfair to the corporation that it will have to pay for the results of that sulk in the form of increased tariffs and regulations. What can corporation chiefs do short of moving their headquarters to a now-independent Moon?
Actually, the Moon might not be that bad of an idea when it gets down to cases. Now businessmen can work themselves into a better position to take advantage of the fact that colonies still need a source of supplies and would rather not pay the cost of having them shipped from Earth. That's if corporations haven't recognized the way the solar winds were blowing and made that move already by the time it reaches the point where Earth tries to regulate interplanetary trade to death. It would be cheaper to expand a colony using resources from the asteroid belt, especially once the investment in widescale space-based industrial capacity has already been made.
More seriously, though, banks will not be the businessman's friend during the turbulent time when Earth has to get used to the fact that it doesn't rule the solar system anymore. It might still be the big boy on the block, but the combined forces of the colonies fighting for independence – plus the ones that were never really all that enthusiastic about it but got dragged along for the ride anyway – were enough to force Earth to give them at least a little respect. The finance industry has wiped out people's retirement funds over much less and businesses that want to protect their liquid assets from getting steamrollered should be moving them into the same cryptocurrencies that the colonies may already be using.
It's not even paranoia when the banking industry yanked the accounts of Tavex, the largest gold dealer in Sweden, giving a vague reason: “general business decisions.”xxv If it can happen to a large precious metal dealer, it can happen to just about any corporation that doesn't remain flexible enough to cope with changing business environments, such as Sweden's apparent wish to do away with anything that resembles physical currency like gold and silver. If a corporation cares about not having its accounts yanked without notice for no reason other than a “business decision,” that means corporations can legitimately make the “business decision” to move their liquid assets into a currency that can't be shut down in any way short of shutting down the entire Internet. Running a full node doesn't even need to be very expensive if a corporation chooses options that allow it to effectively outsource the data processing involved.
This is especially true when you're doing business in an environment that has no banks. “Take me to your banker” would make even less sense than “Take me to your leader” in the minds of most colonists. They'll be used to carrying their currency on their tablets if they have any currency at all. They don't particularly need bankers to process transactions when their server handles that job for them. This might come off as a sneaky, backhanded way to build a financial infrastructure for future space colonization, but it works for colonists who have more important things to think about than where they're going to put the ATM and may still be smarting from having had to fight off a centralized power structure that relied on banks to manage the funding for the war.
Corporations are in this to make a profit. Nobody who has ever actually run a business will blame corporations for making the existing system work for them even if it means moving to places with a friendlier tax code and regulatory environment. That's true now when large corporations outsource manufacturing jobs to China for the cheap labor and that will be true centuries from now when the Moon looks like a good place to move corporate headquarters to. Look at it this way, banks are not loyal to even their largest account holders when the chips are down and government bureaucrats don't like to admit that they are the reason that so many corporations look for tax havens and a friendlier regulatory environment, so why should you care about them?
So setting up an interplanetary banking system might seem like the easy, obvious, and sensible thing to do, but it's not necessarily the best option in an environment where colonies don't trust Earth and don't necessarily trust one another, either. Continuing to use traditional banking services is about the only way corporations are going to owe banks anything. Of course the banks are going to throw a tantrum when they realize that they can no longer jerk around with their customers, charge high fees for services that should be next to free, and generally make people's lives miserable by holding their money hostage. That won't matter to you when your corporation's liquid assets are sitting securely on a server at Fra Mauro City and you are enjoying 18 holes at the Alan Shepard Memorial Golf Resort.
Chapter 4: The Decentralized Blockchain Ledger

I've already mentioned that cryptocurrencies make use of a new kind of ledger called the Blockchain, but this is a point that requires some clarification before we go much farther here. The original Blockchain is designed to avoid the concept of storing all of your vital financial records in a single, easily modified spreadsheet that is stored on a server or servers that reside on a single, hackable private network. It's designed to not rely on any single third party. If you have some technical know-how, you could probably even set up your own node on a server in your basement so you aren't trusting someone else to not run a Sybil Attack. The three points to remember here are:
Records on the Blockchain cannot be modified unless they are duplicated or the Blockchain's entire network is wiped clean.
The Blockchain was designed to be stored on multiple full nodes that frequently update one another with new data, there is no theoretical limit on how many full nodes can exist on a Blockchain network, and those nodes can be separated by any amount of distance if set up with the laws of physics in mind.
The Blockchain does not particularly care what kind of data is being stored on it.
We've mentioned in Chapter 2 that the decentralized Blockchain ledger as it was originally conceived does come with some security issues that can be resolved by an alert Blockchain expert who can spot the red flags. The expert need not worry about the integrity of records if an attack can be detected early enough, however, because the records on the Blockchain can not be altered in any way short of wiping the memory of or destroying all valid nodes on the decentralized network. Basically, users of the Blockchain are trading the ability to edit records after they've already been saved to the ledger for the ability to be absolutely sure that records on the Blockchain ledger can't be tampered with and, if someone tries, that attempt will be easily detected and dealt with.
Any malicious actor that wishes to alter existing records would need to choose a starting point on the original Blockchain to begin adding fraudulent records and this leads to what Blockchain experts call a fork. Effectively, this is a parallel chain of records that would only be able to exchange data with the original if it could somehow be accepted as a valid one-way or two-way sidechain. If there is a dispute that involves duplicated records on a chain that has been forked, the fork that controls more processing power and contains more records is regarded as the valid one by default.
This is not just paranoia. In 2013, a fork in the Bitcoin Blockchain caused by a buggy update was detected and shut down before it had the chance to gain enough processing power to establish itself as the valid chain.xxvi At the time, Bitcoin developers saw the wisdom of not bullying Bitcoin miners and users into upgrading to the malfunctioning Version 0.8. Instead, they backtracked and hit the reset button to get things back on track. It was called a “counterintuitive solution” because the developers could have refused to admit a mistake and insisted on staying the course with the upgrade. Instead, they decided that keeping the trust of the Bitcoin community was more important.
For this reason, the amount of resources that are required to maintain the Blockchain and generate new records is regarded as a built-in security feature. If an organization chooses to invest in enough processing power and storage to make it expensive for a malicious actor to attack the Blockchain by forking it, such an attack will usually be regarded as more trouble than it's worth. In the occasional case where somebody actually succeeds in creating a longer chain of records, the cryptographic hash and timestamps can still be compared to give a more complete picture of when and where the chain was forked.
What this means for a future interplanetary economy is that any individual, organization or coalition that wishes to hijack the ledger or fraudulently alter records will essentially have to overwhelm the collective resources controlled by the entire decentralized network. An especially large and powerful colony (or Earth) might be able to manage it, but in a perfect universe, that will come at the cost of its trading privileges. Somebody will notice if that happens and can warn the other colonies to isolate the fraudulent actor.
This is assuming that the cryptocurrency of choice relies on Proof-of-Work algorithms to secure and relay transactions. Proof-of-Work is increasingly seen as an inefficient way to do things and colonies that don't have the resources to spare may choose to invest in good network security and the alert Blockchain expert instead. The important thing is to be able to spot a fork in the Blockchain before it has a chance to become a problem.
As importantly, the ledger will not be very susceptible to mistakes made by human accountants and bank tellers. There will be no human banker who can forget to log this month's loan payment or get distracted into making a mistake when you deposit your paycheck. That client on your tablet basically functions as your bank account and personalized ATM. In the vast majority of cases where somebody sent the wrong amount of Bitcoin or sent it to the wrong address, that was their mistake. At most, colonists would know a good Blockchain expert who can keep an eye on the whole thing and find out what happened if a transaction is disputed.
The Blockchain expert looks at the matter from the perspective of somebody who cares about maintaining the integrity of his system and also cares about not having his time wasted. Did your spacecraft get repossessed because you weren't making payments on it? Too bad, kid, maybe you shouldn't have gotten fired from your job as a space miner. Did your spacecraft get repossessed because your lender was fooling around with the Blockchain? Yeah, you're right, the chain got forked at the point right before you made your last payment. That has to be massively annoying, but we'll ask the colonies to isolate the lender until he knocks it off and work on getting your spacecraft back on its way to you.
The rest is mostly details that can change depending on the needs of the organization. Regulatory compliance issues or a simple wish to hide sensitive data from competitors might cause an organization to choose a private Blockchain ledger that's tough for attackers to crack, let alone hijack. An organization that cares about transparency might choose a public Blockchain ledger that grants anyone who is interested “read-only” privileges – the ability to inspect but not create records. Future colonial trading partners may choose to put limits on the number of nodes that each colony can have or put strict controls on exactly who can run a node to prevent the network from being overrun with illegitimate extra votes. From the perspective of colonies that might be interested in trade but don't want to give up the ability to control their own internal governance, the only wrong answers are ones that might create or exacerbate issues that could cause a colony to collapse or give up its sovereignty against its will.
So the Blockchain is basically a kind of ledger that has been designed to throw up some fairly obvious red flags if somebody tries to tamper with it. If one colony says that this is the correct version of the ledger and eleven other colonies with exactly identical copies of the ledger say that their copies are telling them something different, who are you going to believe? A Blockchain expert can compare timestamps and the lengths of both versions of the Blockchain to determine who is more likely to be telling the truth. That's the value of having a ledger that is cryptographically secured and can store records in multiple, distant locations.
Chapter 5: How The Blockchain Network Works

There are three basic types of networks: centralized, decentralized, and distributed. It's especially important to note that cryptocurrencies are decentalized networks – clients linking to nodes and nodes linking to each other – and not distributed networks in which each device is equal to all other devices. A typical Smart Phone would not be able to run Bitcoin if it had to store all of the Blockchain data as a full peer on the relevant network, but it can store a lightweight client that connects to a node on a server that can store that data.
A Bitcoin client only needs to be able to connect with one valid node in order to function, although it's normal for a sufficiently robust client to be able to “see” a few nodes. A Bitcoin node can easily connect to four or five other nodes if the available bandwidth allows for it. This makes it easy to implement a system that makes use of algorithms like CryptoNight, in which each full node gets an equal vote on what happens on the Blockchain network. This kind of algorithm makes it even harder for one colony or planet to take complete control of the system because not only would it ideally be limited in the number of nodes it can have by the trade agreement it signed, but it would also have to get the agreement of a sufficient number of other nodes to maintain that control.
This kind of system would make it easy to enforce the terms of a trade agreement if not entirely stop misbehavior before it starts. An industrial station in the asteroid belt would know that it gets one vote and only one vote. It's less likely to cheat Mars on a contract when individual Martian colonies might control a dozen nodes by the time it becomes an issue. Likewise, Mars won't want to cheat somebody in the asteroid belt because its industrial stations control a dozen nodes. Saturn may eventually show interest in joining the Blockchain network and, besides acting as a tiebreaker vote, will be more impressed if both Mars and the asteroid belt demonstrates civilized behavior. A decentralized network can kick a single node off that network if it misbehaves and not really notice much of a difference. This would have an effect similar to slapping economic sanctions on a government that will not act in a civil manner toward the rest of Earth. The colony may not care much if it hasn't done much actual trading, doesn't own any assets in other colonies, and is entirely self-sufficient, but its members will recognize that nobody likes a troublemaker.
The links between full nodes in the Bitcoin system might be thought of as an interstate highway system designed to handle heavy traffic, while the side roads handle the lighter traffic between each node and the clients connected to it. If one “interstate highway” goes down, the affected node or nodes will search for a way to establish a new connection with other nodes so that they can keep their data current without too much of a hiccup. If for some reason one node can't – if there's a planet in the way, for instance – the node can still store Blockchain data it hasn't transmitted yet.
A Tangle of Sidechain Threads

The problem with this, though, is that most cryptocurrencies require multiple confirmations to validate a transaction. Essentially, the transaction data has to be processed and relayed to multiple nodes that can accept the transactions as valid. Colonists will likely become impatient if they have to wait for those confirmations simply because Jupiter won't get out of the way very quickly. The problem might be solved by having multiple nodes on site or it might be solved by making use of a parallel sidechain that regards transactions as valid with as little as one confirmation and stores local transaction data until it can conveniently exchange data with distant nodes elsewhere in the solar system. A sidechain can be regarded as a semi-independent miniature Blockchain that is designed to work in tandem with the master Blockchain.
Exchanges between a sidechain and its master Blockchain can be one-way – one chain sends a transaction to the other and then never sees it again. When you see references to Bitcoin being burned, it means that Bitcoin is being sent from its Blockchain to a sidechain, and then the sidechain can't send that Bitcoin back to the main Blockchain. This makes the Bitcoin as unusable as a piece of paper that caught fire. Colonies might prefer a two-way sidechain in which they can send data back and forth between the sidechain and the master Blockchain as often as they wish and never have a issue with earning the cryptocurrency back after they've spent it.
This is similar to an organization having subordinate servers in satellite offices that wait until most of the employees have gone home for the night before exchanging large amounts of data with other servers in the corporate headquarters. It takes a load off of available bandwidth and saves time for people who happen to be on the spot. Like these subordinate servers, a parallel sidechain can wait until it has a clear line of communications to distant nodes before it sends transaction data.
Some people may argue that we won't even need a "master" Blockchain. One recent innovation is the Lightning Network, which is designed to confirm transactions more quickly by making use of a collection of sidechains that don't necessarily need to communicate with a master chain. They just update one another with new information whenever it's convenient. When the ever-dreaded Blockchain bloat becomes a concern, a future Lightning Network might include sidechains used for purposes other than handling the accounting for a currency. It might include a Smart Contract sidechain that can check with the Public Notary sidechain if there's a question about who owns what and do it faster on a multifunction version of the Lightning Network than it would if it had to search a master Blockchain that holds everything.
A lot of sidechains could be seen as a collection of threads that can become horrendously tangled if the expert setting it up isn't careful. Sidechains for an interplanetary economy will have to be carefully planned in a way that accounts for annoyances like the laws of physics, which can mess up the network's ability to determine which transaction came first. In the hands of a skilled Blockchain developer, sidechains can become a smoothly integrated part of the Blockchain network that runs the financial side of trade between colonies.
Adding to the Standard Networking Model

The Blockchain ledger can be seen as an application that stores data in a way that is searchable and viewable by anyone who has the right tools. You could search for transaction information on the Bitcoin Blockchain using IP address, Bitcoin address or SHA hash by visiting Blockchain.info xxvii or just be impressed by the many thousands of dollars' worth of Bitcoin that can change hands every minute by watching the scroll of the latest transactions.
This is what networking specialists would call the application layer of the 7-layered OSI Networking Model, in which information has already been assembled in a form that an application can present in a meaningful way. A protocol like HTTP is regarded as an application layer protocol because it tells web browsers how to interpret the coding needed to display websites. Cryptocurrency clients would not be able to function as a user-friendly application without a standardized way to present information in a way that makes sense to the average user.
Alex Oberhauser is one expert who says that the OSI model doesn't really need to be modified much to accommodate cryptocurrencies. The model used would simply need two more layers that deal purely with cryptocurrencies and Blockchain apps. The first proposed layer, called the Blockchain Message Exchange, would be added on top of the application layer to provide an additional “handshake” in which both nodes confirm that the other is a valid, compatible node and agree on a protocol to use for communications. This layer would negotiate the specifications and serialization of binary packages to be transmitted. The Blockchain Message Exchange can be separated from the operating system of the host machine and placed in a library that can be accessed only by applications and protocols that involve the relevant Blockchain in some way.
The other layer resides above the Blockchain Message Exchange. This layer is called the Blockchain Overlay Network and can operate with higher level functionality to allow for the management of multiple Blockchains. This would be especially useful for colonies that trade in six cryptocurrencies and also run Blockchains that manage financial services such as contracts and notary services because it automates the discovery of new Blockchain networks and the management of Blockchain networks already used by the colony. It might appear to the end user as a form of middleware that allows for development and customization of apps that make use of the Blockchain.xxviii
The decentralized Blockchain network and ledger is one of the two major reasons that cryptocurrencies are uniquely suited to act as a true international or interplanetary medium of exchange – the other being that cryptocurrencies have a very low barrier to entry even for people who can't open a checking account at a normal bank for whatever reason. The decentralized network ensures that there's no single point of failure and limits the number of ways that a single entity can take control of the network for its own profit. Even if one or a few nodes go down, the rest of the colonies still have complete copies of the ledger that they can use for reference.
Chapter 6: Creating A Complete Financial System With The Blockchain

The original Blockchain was designed to store transaction data. Any time so much as a single Satoshi changes owners, the Bitcoin Blockchain logs that as a transaction. (Think of a Satoshi as being a penny, if you like. If you find one on the digital sidewalk, that's considered lucky, but it's still the smallest possible denomination of Bitcoin.) Then it can be seen as an ordinary accounting ledger that keeps track of debits and credits.
The fact that it can record currency transactions is pretty cool, but currency isn't all there is to a financial system. The interesting thing about the Blockchain is what everybody in the cryptocurrency community is talking about these days. It can store transaction data for a cryptocurrency. It can also store encrypted files such as an ebook – although I'm sure I annoyed the owners of full nodes that have to store that data when I encrypted a PDF file on the Bitcoin Blockchain last year. Blockchain technology has been used to register information about a marriage.xxix Estonia has recognized the Blockchain's potential for solving problems with its public notary system and for establishing what it calls an “E-Residency” program.xxx Ethereum uses the Blockchain to create what amounts to the “Version 1.0” of self-enforcing contractsxxxi. So the Blockchain is good for more than just storing transaction data. It can process and store any type of data you like.
Smart Contracts

We have the currency. The next thing that would be useful is a contract system. It's interesting to me that Ethereum's Smart Contracts were unveiled after Bitnation drew up its public notary and Blockchain ID systems because contracts and property rights are both fundamental parts of a free market system where people want to be able to buy and sell with no worries about being cheated. A contract is, by definition, something that can be referred back to when interested parties need to be reminded about what was agreed to.
It's called a Smart Contract because it can actually check to make sure the terms of the contract are being fulfilled and reverse itself if one party fails to fulfill their end of the deal or if it can be established that fraud was a factor, thus making it valuable to create a Smart Contract system that can cross-check with an ID system and a notary system to make sure that the parties have the right to use an asset as part of a trade in the first place. The usual example is that a self-driving car can drive itself back to the dealership if a client stored on its computer receives information that indicates that the owner missed a payment or never had the Bitcoin to pay for it in the first place.
This will naturally be useful in an environment that does not have a well-developed judicial system yet or the judicial system has been rigged against people who have lost money or assets they can't afford to lose due to somebody else's actions, but they also can't afford to hire an attorney or bribe a judge. (And, yes, there really is a rampant corruption problem in the judicial systems of some nations.) Future colonists' word will simply be backed up by Smart Contract systems that can lock assets or return them to their original owners if one of a contract's signatories does not keep up his or her end of the deal. It will not even matter how much those assets were worth because the prevalent use of Smart Contracts creates an environment where the injured party won't have to hire an expensive attorney or spend years pursuing a court case just to get his money back.
This is especially useful for colonies that may have to purchase some supplies by buying futures on commodity markets. They're buying a contract to have commodities delivered at some point in the future. This could protect their interests when buying through marketplaces in which prices can change quickly. The price of tritium might be relatively low right now, but if they don't buy now, that price could double by the time a launch window for delivery opens up. That's tritium they might need for their nuclear fusion power source, so of course they're going to want to take the lower price while they still can. If the provider fails to deliver as promised, the colony gets its money back. Of course the colony might not care much about the money if a provider lets them down, but at least a self-enforcing contract system sends a message to commodities providers that they'd better take any contract they have that includes a space colony as an interested party seriously.  
Ethereum is the best known system for creating Smart Contracts and, in fact, many of the best known Blockchain-based systems that involve Smart Contract technology in some way are built around the Ethereum system. These include tools for placing money on the prediction market such as Augur xxxii, services that provide management of assets on the rental market such as Slock.it xxxiii, and collaborative decision-making apps such as BoardRoom.xxxiv If it involved some form of agreement between multiple individuals or organizations, the details can be stored on the appropriate Smart Contract app and that agreement automatically becomes a self-executing application.
A smart contract system is a program. It keeps track of the truth or falsehood of statements such as, “Bob Smith made this month's car payment on time,” and executes the appropriate actions. If the statement is true, Bob Smith's car stays in his garage. If the statement is false, Bob Smith's car drives itself back to the dealership. The good part here is that Bob Smith can establish that he really did make a payment simply by sending the appropriate amount of the agreed-upon cryptocurrency to a specific address that his contract watches. If he doesn't, at least he'll know where the car went so the situation can be dealt with. That's the value of a Blockchain-based smart contract system in an environment where not all colonists are going to have a comprehensive, fair, and accessible justice system.
Reputation System

How many times have you refused to buy a product because you heard that the manufacturer is not a very good one or you saw that it has only a two-star rating on Amazon? That's the effect that reputation has on buying choices. That's why a significant part of large companies' PR efforts go into managing reputation, especially when there's been bad news of some sort. Nobody wants to buy from somebody with a poor reputation.
In fact, that's one reason some people still hesitate to get into Bitcoin. They've heard about things like Dread Pirate Roberts being convicted of running an illegal drug trading platform with Bitcoin as a payment option on the Dark Web and police departments being infected with malware that holds their computer system hostage and demands a Bitcoin ransom. They don't hear about Bitcoin miners raising thousands of dollars' worth of Bitcoin to donate to a nonprofit organization that helps African children who have been orphaned by AIDS.xxxv This is not the fault of Bitcoin and, in fact, the Blockchain can manage a reputation system in a way that is completely fair and not very prone to “negative reputation attacks” by competitors or grumpy people who just don't like one colony or another. It can do this because it can be set to simply log the event every time that an expected delivery is made on time and with the expected products in the expected condition.xxxvi
Think of it as the interplanetary trade version of a credit score, if you like. Other colonists may be a little more understanding if somebody failed to deliver as promised once out of a thousand trade deals because maybe it was due to circumstances out of his control. However, if a colonist has a reputation of regularly failing to keep up his end of the deal, nobody's going to want to do business with him. Not even the roguish Martian Sisterhoods mentioned in Robert Zubrin's How To Live On Mars will be able to do much business if they have the equivalent of a "street" reputation for never delivering the smuggled ICBMs they promised.
This reputation system would probably run as a sidechain of some sort that can keep track of the number of contracts that a business, colony or corporation has successfully fulfilled and the ratings that people who have done business with that party have left. If a colony holds a “Smart” futures contract to have an Earth-based corporation deliver supplies and the corporation does not deliver as promised, that information is shared with the sidechain and the reputation system logs that as a negative on the corporation's reputation rating so that colonies know not to do business with that corporation in the future. The reputation information will always exist on the system, which means that parties that are willing to trust the Blockchain with their reputation might be able to bribe judges and juries to ignore some shady business they were involved with, but won't be able to bribe Blockchain specialists to make the relevant information stored by the reputation system disappear altogether.
Public Notary System

Estonia is one nation that has recognized the potential of the Blockchain for solving issues with its public notary. In fact, it's signed an agreement with Bitnation to set up a Blockchain application that can be used to help manage its public notary system. The significance of this is that Estonia previously had a flawed notary system that led to rampant real estate fraud and it believes that the Blockchain can help get the notary system back on track.
Property rights are a concern for anyone who cares about living in a civil society that recognizes that people have the right to receive the agreed-upon payment for goods and services rendered and redeem that payment for property, goods and services of equivalent value. There are words for people who use violence to force others to hand over their assets or work for them without compensation. The famous feud between the Hatfields and the McCoys started over a stolen pig, and this was no small matter at a time when the legitimate owner of a pig may have needed to butcher it that autumn to avoid starvation over the winter. Clear demarcations of what, exactly, belongs to two neighboring colonies will be even more important for colonists that care about not starting a fight over who has the right to use resources. If you have two colonies, Colony Y claims territory that gives it access to a surplus of tritium, and Colony X claims neighboring territory that gives it access to a surplus of nickel and iron, how difficult would it be to take that to a Blockchain-based notary system that can recognize both claims so that the two can engage in peaceful trade?
Not too hard, actually, as long as the Blockchain can establish that the territory involved isn't already claimed, in whole or in part, by other colonies. A Blockchain notary system application can check previous records before it recognizes the claim as valid and can reject anything that would cause a duplication or overlap in its records. This solves the problem of overlapping claims and it can also be used to solve the issue of who owns what.
The notary system can log authorized changes in ownership of assets and does not need to notice whether that asset is a piece of real estate or a pig. If the Blockchain had existed at the time of the Hatfield and McCoy feud, attorneys for both families could have looked up the appropriate record and established that, yes, that pig really did belong to the Hatfields.
As Medium asked when announcing the launch of Stamperyxxxvii, “Can Blockchain technology send notaries on vacation for good?”xxxviii Actually, it probably could. It would encourage the retirement of notary officers who could be bribed or distracted by a talkative criminal who aims to use the notary system to commit fraud. The Blockchain would be doing all the work of timestamping and processing new entries, as well as checking to make sure each new entry is a legitimate one that doesn't duplicate existing records.
One final note of interest: Is a marriage a matter for a Blockchain notary system, or a Smart Contract application? If you can legitimately have the matter handled at the county clerk's office, it would be reasonable to say that it's a matter for the notary system. That means marriages, birth certificates and death certificates. As a Bitnation advisor named David Mondrus said during coverage of the first wedding recorded on the Blockchain, “We believe that like the Blockchain, our love and marriage are forever and that our relationship is not defined by governments or the church. So enshrining our commitment to each other in the Blockchain in front of our friends is very dear to us.”xxxix This is simply another case of how the Blockchain does not give a rip about exactly who uses it. It just cares about whether the data stored on it checks out as valid.
However, there are parts of Earth that still say that marriage is usually part of a contract – at least, their societies do even when the government says that's technically illegal. These “contracts” are usually arranged marriages in which the girl didn't have much say in who her husband is going to be. Call that uncivilized if you like, but it would not be at all unreasonable for two grown adults to have a marriage contract that last five or ten years and is renewed only if both spouses agree to it. That way, a married person would never need to feel like she is trapped in a marriage forever even if she was pressured by her family into getting married in the first place. The person who wants to leave would not need to take part in a protracted divorce court battle when he or she could simply walk away and any prenuptial agreements could be regarded as part of the marriage contract. That basically means that he or she could walk away with the same assets that he or she had originally brought to the marriage.
The Supply Chain

This is a natural one to tie in with a notary system that can log transfers of ownership of property because a Blockchain supply chain app would log the movement of assets at each stop in a supply chain. If the McCoys hadn't stolen that pig, the Hatfields could have sold it to a butcher, who would have carved up the meat and sold it to families, restaurants and a pet food manufacturer. The supply chain app can keep track of every step along the routes the meat took to establish where it's been and where it's going.
When shipping raw materials, keeping track of where shipments are coming from might matter if you care about not buying “blood diamonds” that fund civil wars or crude oil that funds terrorism. One barrel of high-grade oil is a lot another one of the same grade. Most refineries don't care much about the source. They just care about the grade. However, in situations where civil rights factor into market forces, a Blockchain supply chain app that's easy for consumers to use will give them some choices about where that oil comes from. Earth might care about refusing to support space piracy when buying shipments of platinum group elements from the asteroid belt. A coalition of colonies that participate in trade with one another might take the more practical route of refusing to trade with a colony that abuses its trading privileges in some way. The Blockchain supply chain app makes it possible for participants in trade to tell where supplies came from so that they can make that choice.
As much as you would love to believe that you scored a sweet deal on Ray-Ban sunglasses if you bought it for $10, it's probably a fake knockoff. Same goes for Ugg boots if they have a “Made in China” tag. Fraudulent knockoffs of luxury products are annoying. If medical equipment that people's lives depend on came from a fraudulent source, that's beyond annoying and a very real problem. In 2010, the World Health Organization estimated that over 8% of medical devices used worldwide may be counterfeit.xl Caveat emptor, right? With a Blockchain supply chain app that provides transparency at every stop, caveat emptor only applies if consumers do not bother checking the relevant blockchain. It can send red flags to personnel at every depot stop along the way if someone attempts to deliver supplies that were never logged at a valid node owned by the manufacturer.
Besides being a good case for colonies to be as self-sufficient as possible and have a few good 3D printers on hand, it's also a case for them to make sure their supply chain is only delivering authentic, quality supplies. That oxygen generator had better work when you plug it in, or you're going to feel like the total heel who ordered it from the wrong source right up until you become incapable of feeling anything at all.
Organizations like Provenance are already on the case.xli Knowing that you bought some Fair Trade tea is good. Knowing exactly where the tea came from because Provenance has a partnership with Cup Above Teaxlii is even better. This can be expanded to the interplanetary economy so that future colonists never have to guess about where their supplies come from.
Voting Apps and Tamper-Proof ID Cards

This might not seem to fall under the heading of a financial system, but how often have you had to show a photo ID before you could buy a case of beer? What if future spaceliners are required to establish that their passengers are who they say they are before they can board? Mars Society president Robert Zubrin likes to talk about the freedoms that future Martians should have in books like How To Live On Mars, such as “the right to immigrate or emigrate,”xliii and I did say that colonies shouldn't necessarily be super obsessive about the ability to prove that you exist, but you'll still be ticked off if you show up at the spaceport and someone claiming to be you has already claimed your slot.
Which means having a form of identification that can't be duplicated easily. A Blockchain-based photo ID system such as the one demoed by Bitnationxliv would make it impossible to duplicate someone else's photo ID without the duplicate being rejected by the valid Blockchain system. It can even take the DMV out of the picture. You could get a photo ID at the same place where you got your marriage contract notarized, if you wish, and that's assuming that notary offices are still in business once everything that relies on a secure, transparent and tamper-resistant form of record-keeping has been moved to the Blockchain.
What's the biggest issue when voting during every election cycle, besides deciding who you're going to vote for? Voting fraud usually comes up. Some voters complained that their votes somehow got changed at the ballot box or they somehow got kicked off the rolls during this year's primary season in the United States of America. Some security experts say that it's ridiculously easy to hack into voting machines and change the results.
However, a voting app can easily be tied to the ID system so that all citizens that have an ID can be automatically registered when they become eligible to vote and receive so many tokens that they can use to cast votes during every election. Instead of going to the polling place, you can take two minutes to cast your vote while you're still at your desk. Think somebody's going to steal your ID and cast your vote for you? Then you can have a chip with your ID stored in it embedded in any body part you like. As an added bonus, nobody's going to steal your ID without you noticing the attempt. If a colony decides it doesn't like the idea of embedding a chip into its' members hands for whatever reason, it would be a good idea to use the biometrics version of two-factor authentication. If the device does not register both your fingerprint and a pulse, the tokens cannot be cast as votes and the device can report itself as stolen.
Voting for public officials is not even the only application that a voting app can be used for. Elon Musk has recently recommended direct democracy as a suitable form of government for a future Martian colony.xlv That means future Martians won't need to waste time writing ineffectual letters or signing equally ineffectual petitions to be sent to their representatives in the government. If they don't like a particular state of affairs, they can just make sure the matter gets added to the ballot this time around so it can be voted on. It might not stop them from getting ticked off if they lose, but at least it would be very difficult to claim voter fraud if the other colonists told them to go lose themselves by casting an overwhelming number of votes against their position.
Issues to be voted on can range from the serious to the frivolous. Colonists can vote on whether to accept an offer from a neighboring colony for a certain quantity of nickel. They can also vote on whether they want carrots or broccoli as their vegetable for dinner tonight. Direct democracy does not sound so unreasonable when each voter ID is assigned so many digital tokens that they can cast as votes and the votes can be automatically tallied in a way that can't be altered after the fact. The futuristic equivalent of blackballing – casting a vote against a candidate or position – may even be possible if some colonists just plain can't stand the taste of broccoli.
This also works for votes on issues that affect an entire coalition of trading partners. Remember that rule where one node equals one vote? This works for protecting the voice of smaller colonies that are going to insist on equal representation for the same reasons that the smaller of the original 13 U.S. states insisted on having equal representation in at least one chamber of Congress. It ensures that a tiny state like New Hampshire has the same two votes in the Senate as a larger state like New York. A similar model used by future trading partners in space will help to ensure that the needs of smaller colonies aren't being ignored simply because of their size.
Yes, a coalition of colonies can also have representation based on population size if they choose to have a representative form of government instead of using direct voting. Nothing here is written in stone yet, though one should keep in mind that smaller colonies may hesitate to join a coalition if they think their voices will be diluted by the size of larger ones. That's why the U.S. Congress uses a bicameral model that includes both the Senate and the House of Representatives. The bicameral model was a compromise between smaller states that were concerned that larger states might be able to control Congress by organizing what would have amounted to an 18th-century political version of a “51% attack” and larger states that did not wish to completely give up their clout. Isn't it great when you don't have to make something an “either/or” choice?
Whatever form this ends of taking, don't forget to implement the concept of “one colony = one node = one vote” in some form – even as part of a compromise – if you care about the rights of your colony not being trampled on. As an additional bonus, a Blockchain voting application can be set to be completely anonymous, or at least pseudonymous in the sense that a randomized string of letters and numbers won't be associated with anybody's name, if there is concern that colonists might be retaliated against for voting a certain way. Coalitions that prefer accountability over anonymity can also go the other way and set the voting app to record the vote of each qualified voter. This way, the voter cannot wiggle out of being confronted with proof of his or her vote if something goes wrong. The voting app is fully customizable to suit the colony that wishes to make use of a nearly foolproof method of voting.
Finance-as-a-Service

These can be combined into an array of services that entrepreneur Alex Oberhauser calls Finance-as-a-Services (FaaS)xlvi. One Blockchain app could be used to enable stock trading and an associated sidechain can be used to enable shareholders who own, say, O-stock xlvii to cast votes at each shareholder meeting. In fact, the NXT system is one example of how this could work because it has a polling system in which users can create polls in which only the owners of a specific asset or currency can vote.xlviii FaaS could become an ala carte service in which colonists can select Smart Contracts, a reputation app and an easy way to vote on important issues if that's all they're going to need at first.
Once a colony's node has successfully relayed a block of transactions, the colonists probably won't know or care which distant node it was relayed to next. This is a lot like most cloud services in which you don't particularly care which server your data is being stored on and might not even remember which city the data center is in for as long as authorized personnel can access the data when they need to, even when it's three in the morning. What makes a Blockchain-based FaaS system different is that nobody except the owner of a data center and his insurance company will care if that particular data center burns down because the data is still safely stored on other nodes on the decentralized network.
What makes this possible is the Blockchain's decentalized nature that cuts out the third party service provider. As we mentioned in the last chapter, a fully enabled Blockchain infrastructure would only add two layers to existing networking models to enable a whole new framework for a financial system. The international financial industry could be thought of as a Finance-as-a-Service system, but it's an inefficient, expensive and manipulative one because it's highly centralized. Would a coalition of colonies put up with one colony trying to exist purely as a central bank for long? Probably not. With Blockchain apps in which each colony's node gets one vote on any issue that involves that system, this coalition probably would have no qualms about kicking these wannabe bankers off the system.
Chapter 7: Cryptocurrencies Reward the Production and Deployment of Resources

It's taken for granted that most space colonies won't be worried about trade for quite a while yet. They'll be doing good if they planned ahead and checked everything off that list of what they'll need to have a sporting chance of actually surviving long-term in a hostile environment. When there was still uncharted dry land on Earth, how many exploration missions have failed because the expedition remembered to bring the fine china but forgot to bring tools that would have helped them live off the land? Probably more than we read about in history textbooks simply because they did not return to tell their tales. The future history of space colonization will be similarly littered with expeditions and entire colonies that failed because they didn't plan adequately. That's why Mars is a lot more fair than most Earth-based societies. The Martian environment might seem unfriendly, but at least it doesn't care about who you are, where you came from, or why you and your pals are on Mars. It just cares about whether you're ready for this.
The same goes for cryptocurrencies, really. To get the full use out of them, you just need to answer a few rudimentary questions that have nothing to do with your individual identity. Can you use a cheap mobile device and download a wallet using the nearest Wi-Fi connection or carry a piece of paper in your pocket? Can you copy and paste a string of numbers and letters or scan a QR code? Are you at all interested in buying and selling on the open market and transacting with people you will never meet in real life with no third party getting in the way? Are you ready for an economic system where banks are no more essential than a set of fine china for survival on the frontier and colonies might just plunk that ATM in a corner of the same room that they use to store emergency supplies if they even decide they want one at all?
From the perspective of a future space colony in an era where the wild frontier is beginning to settle down and colonies are beginning to think about trade, the answer to all of these questions would ideally be, “Yes.” They may be producing surplus resources that they can sell on the open market by this point. They may also have some extra computing power and storage that they haven't really been using much. These could be used to jump-start the earning of cryptocurrencies and a streamlined path to a decentralized network in which very few colonies will be completely left out of the interplanetary economy if they are willing and able to produce resources that can be placed on the open market.
The important thing is to keep the network lubricated. Owners of mining rigs turn them off when it becomes more expensive than it's worth to run them. For this reason, many Blockchain developers like the Ethereum team make use of a digital token called an appcoin to lubricate the network every time data is added. The appcoin changes hands every time somebody uses Ethereum's toolbox. Ether was never really meant to be just one more cryptocurrency that can be pumped and dumped by investors. It was meant as a way to create incentives to help the network run more smoothly.
It's All About The Algorithm You Use

I've mentioned the fact that Bitcoin runs on processing power. These days, Bitcoin is regarded as the least efficient cryptocurrency. Powerful mining rigs are necessary to maintain Bitcoin in a way that makes it expensive to successfully attack. Mining pools in which owners of mining rigs share both their processing power and the rewards do exist. The truly impressive part is that the Bitcoin network has gotten close to controlling three exahashes' worth of computing power as of January 2017xlix.l
Satoshi Nakamoto deliberately chose to make it inefficient by using SHA-256 cryptography because he, she or they recognized that there is usually a trade-off between having an efficient system and maximizing system security. It really doesn't do much good to create the first true cryptocurrency if it can be successfully attacked using a typical laptop.
The SHA-256 algorithm that Bitcoin uses created an entire class of cryptocurrencies called the Proof-of-Work (PoW) cryptocurrencies. These are the cryptocurrencies that rely on processing power to confirm transactions and generate new blocks. Mining rigs that lend work in the form of processing power to each respective PoW currency's network can be rewarded with newly generated currency and mining fees. Most altcoins that make use of SHA-256 are effectively clones of Bitcoin that have been given a new brand and possibly a few additional or upgraded features.
Other cryptocurrencies in this class make use of newer algorithms, such as Litecoin's less resource-extensive Scrypt. (Some sources indicate that a nearly forgotten cryptocurrency called Tenebrix was the first to use Scrypt. Litecoin merely co-opted it and went on to become the second most popular cryptocurrency while Tenebrix tanked.li) Monero uses an algorithm known as CryptoNight, which is designed to be resistant to dominance by both ASICS and machines with fast memory-on-chip systems and give participants an equal right to vote on which transactions will be relayed next.lii DASH makes use of the X11 system, which uses 11 cryptographic hashing algorithms designed for a more fair distribution of currency.liii Groestlcoin was the debut of the hashing algorithm known as Grøstl, which claims to be highly efficient in terms of the amount of energy used to mine it.liv Any or all of these cryptocurrencies, or a new one that combines the aforementioned algorithms in ways that the colonies involved find most useful, can theoretically be maintained by colonies that are willing to contribute any unused processing power to their respective networks. These colonies can receive rewards in the form of new currency and mining fees from the transactions they process.
The obvious benefit of a PoW currency is that it can reward the production and deployment of new resources, especially processing power. If you're a member of a growing colony that can afford to invest in the processing power needed to run a node, you're in the good. However, the obvious disadvantage of PoW from the perspective of a small or average-sized colony is that it's vulnerable to what's called a 51% attack in which somebody controls the majority of the processing power being used to maintain the network. In an ideal situation, one node would always equal one vote that is regarded as equal to every other vote, but an especially large colony or an entire planet like Earth could invest in enough processing power to skew the system in its favor. This would effectively give the votes made by larger colonies and planets like Earth more clout. As Leemon Baird, CEO of Swirldslv, put it:
“"Proof-of-work" means that the node must use an expensive supercomputer to participate. If a colony or station is barely surviving, they won't want to buy and run supercomputers just to keep a cryptocurrency going.”
So a smaller colony will not want to use a PoW currency because this would inevitably lead to the economic equivalent of an arms race that larger powers would win. PoW would inevitably skew the system in favor of larger and better developed colonies as well as planets like Earth that can afford to sink resources into processing power.
Proof-of-Stake (PoS) cryptocurrencies work by rewarding the ownership of a share of the available currency in a particular cryptocurrency network. This type of cryptocurrency often starts out using the PoW model for the sake of generating the first few blocks and then switches over to PoS so that entities that already own a stake in that cryptocurrency can effectively earn interest.
PoS currencies may work better than PoW for creating incentives to jump-start interplanetary trade. Earn a stake in a particular currency by selling surplus fertilizer to nearby colonies and your colony stands a chance of earning interest on that stake. Just be ready for some lively negotiation because buyers will want to get the best price possible so they don't have to give up so much of their stake. If there's a negative to PoS cryptocurrencies, that negative is similar to PoW in the sense that larger colonies and planets can sell more surplus resources and earn a higher stake, therefore earning more interest than small colonies.
Solarcoin is one of only a handful of cryptocurrencies that rewards the actual production of resources rather than their deployment or sale. Call it Proof-of-Production, if you like. One Solarcoin equals one MWh of solar energy generation and the foundation has enough Solarcoin to reward 97,500 TWh of solar power production.lvi At this time, Solarcoins are allocated from a non-circulating generator pool account – essentially a pool that represents solar power that has not been generated yet. The assumption here is that colonies will either use or sell what they can produce. If a future interplanetary Solarcoin network can establish that a colony is producing electricity, that colony may still be a viable one that uses that power and can spend the Solarcoin if its members wish to.
Storj may have finally invented a way to create incentives for actually hosting nodes without needing to invest in processing power: Proof-of-Retrievability (PoR).lvii With a PoR system, computer owners can rent out their unused hard drive space in exchange for financial rewards. Nodes could still relay and confirm transaction data along with agreeing among themselves on the order of transactions and which data is actually valid, but won't need expensive supercomputers to do it.
A PoR system can be a good thing for colonies for as long as Blockchain apps do not run the risk of bloat and put an undue strain on colonial resources. That basically means that developers should plan accordingly and don't invite the unintended consequence of a storage space “arms race”. One of the pluses of Storj's system is that you don't pay for storage space that you don't use. You can just scale up or down as needed. A colony can arbitrarily decide to carve out a 100-GB partition to store the Bitcoin Blockchain and it won't matter if Bitcoin barely even needs half that – and it might not even the case that it's been a few centuries and that chain has gotten long. As of June 2016, the Bitcoin Blockchain was approaching eight gigabytes in size.lviii That means a PoR system takes advantage of what a consumer market should be. In this case, the consumer – a Blockchain system – pays only for what it actually uses regardless of what the vendor – a hard drive's owner – would rather sell to that consumer. Compare that to Bitcoin and its PoW system, which basically laps up all the processing power that the owners of mining rigs are willing to throw at it. Colonists may prefer PoR for the sake of not only avoiding a computer-power arms race, but also making sure that Blockchain-based technology has incentive to remain efficient.
This might not sound like a lot when you could buy an eight terabyte external hard drive for between $250 and $350 depending on brand and modellix, but future space colonies aren't going to be paying the shipping costs of having hard drives delivered to their colony unless there's some kind of practical payoff and finding a good third-party cloud service provider that owns centralized data warehouses on Earth may not be an option when they need real-time data. This means that they may not want to reserve storage space for a full node unless they can get a cryptocurrency network to effectively pay its rent for storage space along with paying for flops. If a cryptocurrency can make use of a PoR algorithm, it can reward colonies for running full nodes in a way that makes the data on those nodes easy to retrieve by the rest of the network with the only limit being the speed of light.
There may be several ways for the Blockchain to reward the production, use and/or sale of resources that experts haven't invented yet, but most of them will likely wind up looking like some variation of established economic principles that have been shown to be sustainable in the real world. Some of them may move away from the strict cryptocurrency model that rewards resources and ownership of currency with the generation of more currency. One could pretty much call the Ethereum Smart Contract model Proof-of-Fulfillment because the parties of any particular contract won't receive, or at least won't keep, the promised rewards unless they keep up their end of the deal. These models will do for starters, though, because they meet the entire purpose of having a medium of exchange in the first place: rewarding contributions to an economic system that is hungry for resources that colonies can create and make available for use now (or at least the “now” that will exist when interplanetary trade becomes a real thing) with the chance to obtain future resources that other colonies create and make available on the open market.
Chapter 8: Why Do We Need A Medium Of Exchange, Anyway?

Contract work will probably become an important part of an interplanetary economy. Mining corporations need to recruit migrant workers who care about making sure their families are taken care of to handle the difficult and dangerous work of extracting resources in the asteroid belt. Some of the wealthier colonists might opt to hire contractors to help with future development of their colonies or to handle some of the less savory tasks required to maintain an existing colony.
We've mentioned before that migrant workers who want to provide for their families might accept a job far from home. These migrant workers usually aren't intellectuals with advanced degrees in the liberal arts. These are people who will not be very impressed by slogans that include some variation of “the greater good” and “From each according to his ability; to each according to his need.” They aren't the ones who sit at a comfy desk, writing ten articles on the latest food fads in fluent English. (Silly Earthers and their smoothies, right?) They are not going to be doing the difficult and dangerous work of mining raw materials in the asteroid belt or setting up a new colony in Jupiter's orbit for no reason.
They will want a system that makes it easy to send money back to their families and build up a good nest egg for themselves. These guys are very likely to trash mining rigs if the company they work for doesn't keep up its end of the deal because they're in it to improve their own station in life. Don't worry, future space colonists, you'll get your colony. Just don't be surprised when the blue-collar workers who are building that colony ask for their pay.
Established colonies might be paid in their preferred cryptocurrency to use their members' knowledge and experience to help get new colonies set up. Future colonists on the way to a growing colony or to a previously unoccupied place where they can just put down a stake might partially fund their trip and stave off boredom by doing freelance work for organizations back on Earth or get a discount by agreeing to take on some of the routine maintenance tasks during their transit time. These contractors and freelancers get paid by one party to do a job and can use it to pay for passage using a company that doesn't have much to do with their employer.
We can sit here and argue about the relative merits of various socioeconomic models all day but that doesn't change the fact that money is a convenient way to make sure that we don't all have to carry bulky trade items with us just to engage in economic activity. It's just easier to pay Amazon and UPS to deliver a new table to our door than it is to haul an expensive gaming rig to Amazon's warehouse to trade for that table, even leaving out the fact that your spouse will probably be mad at you for getting rid of the gaming rig that he traded a goat and five chickens for. The UPS driver probably knows that he could be hauling cargo that's worth more than six months' worth of his wages, but he does it anyway because we pay him for the convenience of not having to go through a complex series of trades to get at what we really want. That way, we can participate in transactions without pissing off family members – most of the time, anyway.
Bitcoin is fintech. It's a tool that can be used to pay workers so that they can feed themselves and their families and they won't trash your mining rig or your colony. No matter how you cut it, Earth's socioeconomic problems should not be used as an excuse to exploit workers and refuse to pay them for their labor. The important thing to remember here is that new and growing space colonies will need people who are willing to work and people will have no reason to work unless they have some kind of payoff.
Some payoffs will be obvious. This is where things start to get a little uncivilized by the standards of the typical Westerner who might be watching the action from the comfort of his armchair. If a real Rip Van Winkle of a colonist refuses to carry out important tasks like maintaining the oxygen generator or tending food crops in the greenhouse, a colony with a majority of members who actually care about not dying because somebody was lazy will boot that colonist.
This is a negative incentive. If Rip Van Wrinkle endangers the colony by refusing to do his job, he's going to get shoved out of the airlock eventually. He might be kicking, screaming and complaining about injustice the whole way out, but his fellow colonists care about not causing the entire colony to collapse due to his laziness and ineptitude. Sloth literally becomes one of the Seven Deadly Sins in this context, and it's an extension of other Deadly Sins like greed and pride when you really think about it. Rip Van Wrinkle was sending the message that he believed his own comfort to be more important than his fellow colonists' survival when he refused to do the work. So in an environment where the colony might not be able to spare a module to isolate him until he comes around, his fellow colonists are being perfectly reasonable to make a decision that puts the good of the colony first even if the result is a negative one for Rip Van Wrinkle.
Being paid for your work is a positive incentive. Think of how you feel when you are handed your monthly paycheck. The neurons in the reward center of your brain are firing because you know that's money you can use to get the landlord off your back. Because this is the 21st century and “company towns” aren't as prevalent as they used to be, the landlord usually doesn't have a lot to do with your employer. He just cares about getting the monthly rent and doesn't particularly care if you earned that money by working as a McDonald's shift manager during the day and plying your side hustle at night. If you have money in your wallet and you got it honest, that probably means you did something of value for somebody else and that gives you the right to redeem that value for a Big Mac if you want. If a colonist winds up doing Rip Van Wrinkle's job on top of her own because the colony finally got fed up with his laziness, she might be less annoyed about the matter if she is compensated with what would have been the other guy's share of the food, water and air.
Let's take a look at the Merriam-Webster definition of money lx:
1:  something generally accepted as a medium of exchange, a measure of value, or a means of payment: as a: officially coined or stamped metal currency b: money of account c: paper money
2a: 	wealth reckoned in terms of money b: an amount of money c 	plural: sums of money: funds
 3: 	a form or denomination of coin or paper money
 
A medium of exchange is really meant to be a stand-in for the concept of a straight-across trade of labor and resources. It was probably invented when one caveman helped another build a fire but the first caveman wasn't hungry right now, so the second gave him a shiny rock that he could exchange for food later. Bitcoin has been called “digital gold” because it replaces the shiny rock with bits on a tablet.
The presence of cryptocurrencies might not be as important to a colony that does not engage in trade. Then it'll just be understood that failure to do the work, or enabling the one colonist who refuses to lift a finger to help with important tasks, could lead to the failure of the entire colony. The negative incentive exists in a harsh environment in which new colonies won't be able to afford dead weight and help will not arrive quickly if something goes wrong. The positive incentive exists when the colony has grown to the point where it might have hundreds of colonists trading chores, trading around food items like you sometimes see kids doing in the school cafeteria, or trading with visiting caravans of rovers. Then it means that the colony has grown to the point where a medium of exchange might actually be a good idea.
The exact form that money as a medium of exchange takes doesn't really matter, except maybe to the traders or bankers who have to transport and store it. Gold, silver, seashells, paper bills and Bitcoin have all been considered money at various points in history. You can pay for a purchase at the department store with your Visa debit card as easily as you can with paper bills. Cryptocurrencies and mobile payment options like Apple Pay extend on that idea by making it possible to carry your currency, store credit and gift cards as bits on a mobile device. The value of money is derived from the idea that it can be exchanged for tangible goods or services in most places and at any time.
As far as “wealth reckoned in terms of money” is concerned, it's a measure of what the assets you own might be worth to other people. It's a measure of demand that can actually vary based on circumstances. A Kalpana One station in the asteroid belt might value an oxygen generator more highly than you do while you're sitting on Earth and not quite as vulnerable to death by asphyxiation, so it'll place a higher bid for a new one that's up for auction. A Martian colonist probably won't be interested in buying a time-share anywhere on Earth for any price, but you wouldn't mind buying a two-week time share in Hawaii, right? Colony Y may find that its tritium mining operation is highly profitable because other colonies need it to produce power, but Earth may still be so terrified of nuclear power that it won't touch the stuff!
The good part about this is that Colony Y does not need a useless time share that it would probably just liquidate anyway. However, it can use Orbitcoin and Solarcoin it earns through the sale of tritium to pay migrant workers to help with the expansion of habitat modules because it's had a major influx of immigrants who are looking for opportunities. These are migrant workers who probably have very little direct impact on the tritium market, but benefit from it anyway because Colony Y can pay them for their labor.
Why does it even matter?

Some people might see the development of a decentralized interplanetary economy as a chance to lose some of the abuses committed by a centralized financial sector. I just say that we shouldn't throw the baby out with the bathwater. A widescale economic system with billions of people engaging in trillions of transactions daily will always be more efficient if it is lubricated by a common medium of exchange. A futuristic UPS will be shipping tangible goods across the vast distances between planets and far-flung colonies throughout the solar system – or, if not UPS, then independent traders who won't want to waste time and resources on an unprofitable run.
No colony will want to waste time participating in a complex series of trades just to get what it needs when it could be using that time pinning down a problem with its solar panels, troubleshooting a malfunctioning oxygen generator, and making sure the tomatoes in the greenhouse aren't developing blight. Anyway, there will be colonies that won't need to rely on trade to get what they need to survive. A colony near the planet Mercury won't need to rely on nuclear power because it's close enough to the sun that those solar panels produce all the energy it needs. Its major export could very well be the iron that its telerobotics mine from Mercury's core, but it's not going to trade that iron for Colony Y's tritium. It doesn't matter how much Colony Y needs that iron or how much tritium it's willing to offer for a shipment. The Mercury colony does not need or want tritium.
The colonists might well be willing to accept Solarcoin for that iron, though. They'll sell a visiting caravan all the iron that those traders think they can sell to other colonies for a profit and then use that Solarcoin to pay other trading partners for resources it does want. The avocado harvest from Florida may have been especially good at the time of the traders' visit and Mercury might be willing to buy some. Then Florida – a pretty gutsy state for being a region on Earth – can use the Solarcoin earned by selling avocados to Mercury to buy tritium from Colony Y for a nuclear power plant and then Colony Y can buy some iron. That means a complex series of trades that happens in a highly efficient manner because no single entity, except maybe future traders who know they'll catch flak for making a mistake while shipping trade goods, has to care much about who needs what.
Remember our migrant workers? At the very least, a space mining corporation should care about not having its mining rigs trashed by angry laborers who feel like they've been exploited. These are workers who might not have been keeping close track of the market value of platinum, but do care about the market value of their labor. They may be signing up for a work contract because they want a nice nest egg for their families or because it's a choice between that and a fast track to prison. Either way, the concept of an honest day's pay for an honest day's work applies if you want to talk about what's fair to the laborer. These are people who won't be very impressed by being tricked into a contract in which they won't get paid while they're trying to claw their way up to a point where they have options other than a life of crime or provide for family members back on Earth. These are people who aren't being greedy for expecting to be compensated for their work, any more than the corporations that hire them are being greedy for wanting to make a Return On Investment by selling the resources that they harvest to whomever has the money to pay for a shipment.
Using cryptocurrencies and Blockchain-based financial applications in an interplanetary economy is really the least unfair way to handle the economic system. Those people who got rich by investing in Bitcoin did it by being the early adopters who took the risk. The same should hold true for the “early adopters” of space colonization who actually succeed in building a viable colony. This may not happen quickly and it's likely that the ones who actually reap the rewards will be the grandchildren and great-grandchildren of those who took all the risks and lived through decades of subsistence living and hard work.
These descendants of the first space colonists who actually succeeded should not be denied their inheritance. This is an inheritance that they probably still live in and work hard to maintain. In this case, decentralization does not only protect against abuses committed by a powerful centralized financial industry or a centralized government. It also protects the rights of colonists who do not wish to be dictated to by complete strangers who think they have the moral and ethical high ground. If third- and fourth-generation space colonists can be counted on for anything, they will continue to do what works for their particular colony for as long as they're left alone. At most, they might choose to join a loosely confederated coalition of trading partners, but they'll only do it for as long as that coalition can guarantee that its sovereignty as a colony will be respected. After all, why should they care about some distant colony that is delusional enough to believe that all colonies should do things their way?
That's the value of having cryptocurrencies that work in an environment where there are no banks or central government with the authority to issue currency. Call them work credits, if you like, especially the PoW ones that reward the use of resources and the PoP ones like Solarcoin that reward the production of resources. If they exist in a form that's spendable, they're proof that someone, somewhere, earned them by providing value to that cryptocurrency's network.
Cryptocurrencies don't care whether they're held by a large colony, a small colony, or a solitary stakeholder on Mars. If you own a stake in a PoS currency, it's assumed that you did something for other stakeholders that was valuable enough for them to give you a part of their stake. Therefore, you don't need to feel like a heel for earning interest on your NXT because it'll be assumed that you got it honest. That's extra currency you can use to lubricate the appropriate economic network of colonies that use it.
Chapter 9: Creating A Governance Structure That's Friendly Toward Cryptocurrencies




Former Congresswoman Cynthia McKinney told me of her time spent talking to constituents who didn't always have a grasp of basic civics, “I had people calling my office because their trash hadn't been picked up.”lxi While talking about her constituents' apparent lack of understanding of the difference between Congress and a city council, she made a valid point. Who's going to responsible for issues ranging from trash disposal to dispute resolution when there are multiple space colonies that are nearly ready to participate in interplanetary trade?
The obvious answer would be that each colony would be responsible for waste management policy that would preferably include recycling as much as possible and internal governance issues such as settling disputes between members of its own colony. If two members of a single colony get into a fistfight because one member accuses the other of theft, how does that get settled in a way that is equitable, fair, and prevents serious injury?lxii If the trash compactor gets clogged, would the one who got caught stealing be the one who gets to fix it this time? Even if a colony has decided at the start that all resources are owned by the colony instead of by individuals, good governance will include a way to handle matters like theft and fistfights that could endanger the colony if allowed to get out of control. At the very least, a habitual thief should get used to dealing with the muck whenever the trash compactor malfunctions.
The lack of an advanced judicial system might seem like a good thing on the surface when discussing an interplanetary economy. Nobody will have to specialize in law just to make sure their colony's members don't lose cases on a technicality or waste years of their lives defending against frivolous lawsuits. Applications based on Smart Contract technology could theoretically manage any agreement that involves more than one colony. However, attorney Joshua Rosenblatt questioned the advisability of relying too much on Smart Contracts:
“Personally, I am [not] yet convinced of the wisdom of “smart-contracts” except for certain, specific and tested, settings. What most non-lawyers don’t realize is that one of the beneficial features of a contract is that it can be breached (with consequences). Hence the old legal adage: 'There’s no such thing as a contract… just options.'”lxiii
This returns us to the need to have some way to settle disputes regardless of whether those disputes involve a contract or not. The good part is that future colonists can pretty much start from scratch when it comes to creating a judicial system that could work when settling disputes between colonies. They could just as handily set up a permanent Intercolonial Supreme Court made up of an equal number of representatives from each colony. This comes with the understanding that colonists would be considered seriously rude at best if they waste the Supreme Court's time with matters that are better handled within the confines of their own colony. The representatives on the Supreme Court would be justified in telling a plaintiff to get lost if he's complaining about his colony's trash compactor malfunctioning.
One of the serious challenges here is that one colony or another could do the diplomatic equivalent of stomping off in a huff if a ruling does not go its way. The United States of America has not recognized the rulings of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) as binding since 1986 for exactly this reason, though it has unbent enough to work with the ICJ on issues of compliance with the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.lxiv Anyone who has been frustrated by an apparent lack of response to calls for the ICJ to try cases of Americans who have been accused of war crimes can see how this might become a problem. What do you do when the colony you have a dispute with refuses to recognize the authority of your preferred venue for settling disputes?
The practical answer is that you can't do much of anything except work on the obvious issues that arise when a party in a dispute refuses to recognize the judicial authority as a valid one. Judicial systems with authority levels similar to the International Court of Justice – which is obviously dependent on being recognized as a valid authority for its rulings to have any kind of clout – could say that colonies can't use their system until they settle any outstanding disputes filed using the system. That may not stop an especially stubborn colony from being willing to take the chance that it won't ever have a legitimate complaint against another colony. However, that colony has every right to be stubborn on the understanding that nobody's going to take it seriously if it suddenly wants to use the interplanetary court system to settle a complaint of its own.
“Don't Tread On Me”

To be fair, colonies may have a reason to be stubborn about any implication that they might have to give up their internal sovereignty for the sake of participating in trade. The original 13 states of the United States of America were similarly sensitive to the possibility of being trampled on by an outside power. This attitude had already led to the Revolutionary slogan, “Don't tread on me.”
Even when it became obvious that a loose confederation of states was not working, the framers of the Constitution were still so nervous about the idea of a strong centralized government that they encoded the concept of states' rights and individual rights into the first ten amendments. An initial confederacy between colonies with this attitude will include an acknowledgement that each colony has the right to manage its own internal affairs as it sees fit.
Which gets back to Cynthia McKinney's remark about civics: Who's going to be responsible for carting away the refuse? How do you choose a model that is most conducive to colonial survival without letting the colony's problems spill over to affect other colonies that wouldn't appreciate it?
The trick is to choose one that you don't ever have to defend the validity of when outsiders want to ask questions. Colonies can fail because they were paralyzed by a governance and socioeconomic structure that hobbled their members' ability to make the necessary decisions quickly and without fear of political fallout. Colonies can also fail because the matter of who is going to be responsible for which jobs was not clearly laid out. A colony that survives and grows to the point where it's ready to participate in actual trade with other colonies should be defense enough in the mind of any reasonable newcomer to an existing colony.
The most important thing here: Motivation. Why are you motivated to form a space colony, anyway? The ones who are in it purely to make a fortune are as valid as the ones who are in it for less selfish reasons. A hardcore Libertarian colony has as much chance of succeeding as a Venus Project colony or a highly authoritarian colony if they can all stay realistic enough to recognize that the universe is not impressed by idealism. The solar system is likely to be filled with the empty husks of colonies whose members came up with the wrong answers. On the one hand, you probably have your pride; on the other, you'll have to ask yourself whether that pride is worth sacrificing the survival of your colony as a viable, independent and self-sufficient entity for.
Equally importantly, what's motivating the fellow members of your colony? Recently I teased supporters of the Venus Project about the lack of spaceports in any of their pictures, but there was a serious aspect to my teasing. They're beautiful pictures, but let's be realistic. If the members of any particular colony do not have any obvious way to leave if they become dissatisfied, that's going to get interpreted as meaning that the colony is no better than North Korea when things develop to the point where trading caravans might be able to visit on a regular basis. If your fellow colonists' motivation is that members of their families will be punished if they step out of line or leave, your colony is setting itself up for trouble.
It's getting into the idea that humans have been moving around since forever. If a person or group of people don't feel welcome, they may decide that it's better to leave than fight. Our species pretty much conquered Earth that way. Some segments of the human population have survived over centuries because they could recognize that it was time to bug out. If a colony evolves into a tyrannical dictatorship – and a few inevitably will – it will not want its members to leave bearing tales of the human rights abuses it commits. In this case, the good intentions of its founders are not going to matter. Neither will any amount of propaganda or pretty pictures. The assumption that the creators of models like the Venus Project know what's best for all of humanity is one path to tyranny and perhaps this is why its images never included any spaceports.
In more free societies, though, the colonists will be able to leave if they feel like they just don't fit in with very few hangups. Likewise, a free colony may occasionally take in members from other colonies on the understanding that the newcomers will have to earn their place – assuming, of course, that the colony has extra resources that can be used to support immigrants. It's assumed that the members of any given colony are willing to do the work, but one earmark of a free society is that its members won't get dragged in front of a tribunal just because they voluntarily agreed to swap around chores that they dislike doing.
In an environment where people are trading work, it won't be difficult to see how the need for a medium of exchange might arise. Perhaps a colonist has already completed all of his tasks for the day, but he doesn't want to be seen as the Rip Van Wrinkle of the colony, so he offers to help with the menial tasks in the greenhouse. He doesn't really need anything in exchange right this second, but because he's working with plants and the stuff they grow in, he might need more water later so he can wash up. So he receives a token that he can redeem for that water because he took on extra work. That token means that the water sanitation engineer who receives it won't be ticked at our overachiever because the water sanitation engineer might be able to redeem it for extra tomatoes in his salad at dinnertime.  
The interesting thing to note here is that a water sanitation engineer is not the same thing as a hydroponics engineer. The water sanitation engineer accepts the token from somebody who took on extra work in the greenhouse, not because he particularly enjoys the extra work involved, but because he anticipates that he will be able to redeem it for future favors. That's how a medium of exchange that most members of a society recognizes as valid gets started. At this point, it doesn't really matter whether that medium of exchange is a cryptocurrency or somebody's NASA mission patch collection that got smuggled into the O'Neill cylinder somehow. It's just floating around, ready to be redeemed for favors on the assumption that its holder earned it by generally being a helpful person.
Sure, it might create inequality, but it also creates motivation. At this point, inequality implies that one colonist was willing to go the extra mile and take on additional necessary tasks to keep the colony functioning and another wasn't, so one colonist got the token that could be redeemed for additional resources and another didn't. People become more motivated when they can trade extra work now for extra resources later. The closest analogy on Earth would be that one person you know at work who makes extra money with a side gig that he works during the evening and weekends. He gets the same salary as you at work, but he paid off his credit cards while you're still struggling to make the minimum payments on yours. Jealous? Sure you are. But that's the value of a system in which people are rewarded for taking on more work.
When you choose a socioeconomic model that rewards people for taking on extra work, you can worry less about who's in charge of carting away the garbage because your colonists will be more cheerful about tossing their sorted refuse down the appropriate recycling chutes if they know they're getting something out of it. They have the freedom to enhance their station in life from the initial subsistence level to having a colony that is ready to create surplus resources for trade. As a bonus, you can do all this without ever treading on them. That's assuming that your colonial leadership does not wish to live in a nasty, run-down O'Neill cylinder that is full of garbage because nobody cares enough to exert themselves any more than what they have to do to avoid being punished.
Trade Means More Work

One of the major selling points of international trade is that it creates more job opportunities and access to additional resources that can't be produced locally. Canada does not have a climate that is friendly toward growing oranges, but Canadians who have an appetite for tropical fruit can buy oranges from growers in Florida and California. That means orange grove owners have more money they can use to pay the expenses associated with growing, harvesting and selling oranges. Perhaps they will use part of their profits to buy maple syrup produced in Canada.
Under ideal circumstances, trade will enrich all members of the colonies that engage in interplanetary commerce. That means taking stock of who, exactly, makes important decisions and manages the finances for your colony. We've already established why centralized financial centers would not be an ideal situation for an interplanetary economic system. For the same reason, there should be checks regarding who can control the money within the colony.
The extra work that comes with increased trade can be a good thing or a bad thing. If your goal is an economic environment in which everybody has a job and makes a decent wage, trade is a good thing because more people are earning money and spending money. If your goal is to have no currency whatsoever, trade is not such a good thing because then you'll be put in the embarrassing situation of explaining to your colonists why the interplanetary trading caravans won't visit even though they could have brought products that could have made their lives easier. Then you're making decisions about who can buy and sell.
Then there's the models that would put a computer in charge of distributing resources. Maybe that's good in theory, but computers are very good at doing what they're told to do. When a computer messes up, sometimes it's faulty software, which implies that a programmer or Quality Assurance expert messed up somewhere along the line. Sometimes it's a PEBCAK error – an acronym for “Problem Exists Between Chair And Keyboard.” A PEBCAK error implies that it's the user who messed up, usually because the user didn't know any better. In the distant future, that acronym could evolve to mean that somebody caused the problem on purpose. The point here is that it's almost never the computer's fault when something goes wrong. If the computer makes a mistake, there are usually external factors such as a human who deliberately gave the computer false data to process for the sake of pursuing his or her own agenda.
Even the Blockchain won't be completely immune to this. A human could scan in products to be shipped and then “arrange” for the shipment to be intercepted in transit, and the most that the application can do is tell those who check that the products never arrived at the next stop in the supply chain and spot it if the shipment arrives at an unexpected checkpoint.
For reasons like this, models that rely on a centralized power structure shouldn't be trusted, regardless of whether those models rely on a computer-based system or not. Who is going to be in charge of programming and maintaining the computer system if you choose to rely on one for governance? Is it somebody who is so immature that they throw tantrums every time someone disagrees with them (like most tyrants)? Is it somebody who's going to make people's lives unpleasant by shutting down government-funded services until they get their way (like some members of the U.S. Congress)? Is it somebody who is incompetent at governance (like Detroit's city government)? How can we count on the computer system being programmed and maintained in a way that makes its decisions as fair as possible for all parties concerned?
This is something that cryptocurrency and Blockchain insiders are very sensitive about. Decentralized systems can provide redundancy and neutrality while still providing many of the same functions as traditional governance and financial systems. The Blockchain is designed to be both redundant and neutral simply because it doesn't particularly care who uses it or what type of data is stored on it.
The real key of getting the maximum benefit out of the Blockchain is respect for both property rights and the free market system. If you hear that some municipal government is abusing eminent domain to drive people out of their homes so they can put an upscale shopping center in that location, it's perfectly reasonable to get mad. The municipal government is trampling on property rights for the sake of increasing the amount of property taxes it can collect. The municipal government knows it can get away with that because they usually target people who don't have the resources needed to fight back by taking it to the courts.
Colonists would ideally never have to put up with similar behavior from more powerful colonies and human parasites who think they need access to resources more than the hardworking colonists do. In this case, respect for property rights is not “theft” despite what some lazy yuppies want you to believe. Theft in this case would mean denying colonists the right to the fruits of their labors. Theft means causing the deaths of honest and hardworking colonists by seizing the resources that they put a lot of effort into producing so that they can live in a dignified fashion. Property rights are going to be essential for colonies who care about not dying because somebody with more firepower or more guile came along and stole their resources.
The same goes for the free market system. The free market says that the demand for food, shelter and power is not going to go away anytime soon, but consumers can choose whether they want to spend their money at Wal-Mart or Whole Foods, or even buy some seeds from the Seed Savers Exchange so that they can grow heirloom vegetables in their gardens. They can choose to live in one of those micro-houses instead of living in an ugly McMansion.  They can choose whether they want to install solar panels or rely on the power grid – and, depending on which U.S. State you live in, you can even effectively rent your solar panels from SolarCitylxv if you prefer. The free market that is powered by perfectly neutral Blockchain applications would make no judgments about how consumers choose to spend their money because there would be no way for a centralized authority to choose winners and losers.
So instead of becoming angry at entrepreneurs like Elon Musk for knowing how to keep a straight face while in the same room as an important customer, consider what a Blockchain-based financial and governance system could enable. When implemented correctly, it can create a level playing field with no artificial barriers to entry. Even as things stand now, thousands of dollars' worth of Bitcoin change hands every minute and this happens because its users understand the value of being able to conduct voluntary transactions with no third party getting in the way.
This concept could take off with space colonies that are interested in signing a multi-colony trade agreement simply because they don't want to be forced to trade with one another. Sure, a lot of colonists might be rolling their eyes if a Venus Project colony refuses to buy Helium-3 from Colony Y because Colony Y actually allows its members to have Orbitcoin wallets and participate in private transactions with one another. What a bunch of hippies, right? However, maybe the Venus Project orbits the sun somewhere near, obviously, Venus and can produce all the solar power it needs anyway. The Venus Project isn't even affecting the value of Helium-3 very much when Colony Y can still sell to Earth at a price of $15,000 per gramlxvi.
If a colony that uses the Venus Project model even wishes to participate at all, one thing it'll have to do is get used to the idea that it just controls one vote out of several. That means it's not always going to get its way on any issue that affects more than one trading partner, some of which use very different socioeconomic models. It can't force trading caravans to make frequent stops at its docking port if going out to the Venus Project colony is just not a profitable run. It can't force other colonies to redistribute their resources to support the Venus Colony when it's going through a rough time. That's the way a decentralized free market works in a solar system where many colonies might have reason to mistrust a centralized system like the one that the Venus Project uses.
Chapter 10: What Makes Space Colonization So Conducive To Cryptocurrencies, Anyhow?

The idea that Satoshi Nakamoto might have been an alien might make for an amusing History Channel documentary. As a popular meme inspired by the History Channel's “Ancient Aliens” program says, “I'm not saying it was aliens, but it was aliens.”lxvii In all seriousness, Satoshi probably didn't come from another planet any more than Elon Musk did, but it should still be seen as no coincidence that digital currencies like Bitcoin became a hot topic right when we're at a decision point as a spacefaring species. Do we develop to the point where interplanetary trade becomes a reality? Or do we backslide in the belief that there are other, more important things we could be doing as a species?
It wouldn't be the first time a new technology had to wait for the right time and place to catch on. The idea of a computing machine that was more advanced than a simple abacus didn't catch on until the mid-20th century even though at least one rudimentary calculating machine had actually been built in the 18th century.lxviii Even when NASA acquired a mainframe supercomputer in the 1960s, it still called upon its cadre of human computers to check its work and wouldn't have relied on the supercomputer in any case since those things were slow and had a terrible habit of overheating. Most of the time, it was just faster to ask the math whizzes to handle the calculations – and for those of you who care, these calculations and, later, programming the new computers were considered to be women's work at the time.lxix Now laptops and mobile devices are everywhere and pretty much taken for granted.
Similarly, Bitcoin showed up at a time when the technology behind it could be refined as needed to handle the job of acting as a backbone for an interplanetary economic system. When I first comprehended what Bitcoin is, my entire reaction was, “Okay, cool, so it's like a rudimentary, 21st century version of Star Trek's Federation Credits.” It's a way to go shopping on Deep Space Station K-7 without having to carry a purse or risk losing your cash to a pickpocket. I never once saw an ATM or a bank on DS9 and it wasn't because aliens don't use currency (and anyway, it would have been hard to justify Quark's presence on Deep Space 9 if he couldn't make a profit). Someone wishing to make a purchase can authorize a transaction by entering some data on an electronic tablet and pressing his thumb against a reader. With Bitcoin, we're just seeing the rudimentary version of what cryptocurrencies could become in an environment where the colonization of space is likely to become highly decentralized as more organizations get involved.
The colonies are likely to be a diverse lot that won't have a lot to do with one another at first. We'll get the ones with a socioeconomic structure that they want to test in an actual colony and the ones who couldn't possibly care less about socioeconomics as long as their colony is a viable one. We'll get the ones who are fleeing oppression, the ones who are in it to become rich and famous, the ones who just want a small stake in the outback where they can be left alone, and the ones who think it's plain friggin' cool. At this point, there are very few wrong answers to the question of why you might want to join the space colonization effort. As Robert Zubrin put it, “A noble experiment? We will try everything. What works will last.”lxx
For right now, the important thing is to remember that you'd have a very difficult time trying to find a centralized authority that can speak for all space colonies. Depending on which colony an outsider chooses to visit, a demand to “Take me to your leader” may come off as the utterly baffling to a colonist because there isn't and never was a single leader in that particular colony, let alone a President of the United Federation of Planets. These are people who probably have very little reason to trust centralized power structures and even less to trust a strange man in a nice suit who is offering what could wind up being a devil's deal.
This won't change the fact that future colonies may still have a wish list that includes future goals for expansion or necessities that they don't have the local resources needed to fill. They may want to entice migrant workers to help them add a new habitat module to support a growing population. They may need more tritium for a nuclear reactor because they're living out beyond the asteroid belt, where solar power is not a viable option. One thing they might have a surplus of is platinum group elements they've harvested from nearby asteroids. That's something they can sell on the open market to pay the migrant workers for their labor and buy some tritium from another colony that produces an abundance of tritium.
Colonists will naturally want to join a network that enables trade with other colonies that might possess resources they need but doesn't require them to give up their own sovereignty. They may voluntarily agree to certain terms that protect the rights of each individual colony. When in doubt, don't launch the battleships or even do anything that could be interpreted as sticking your nose into another colonies internal affairs, and also don't be afraid to push back if other colonies won't show you the same courtesy. The concept of “one colony = one vote” applies equally to both a large colony that will face consequences if it abuses its trading privileges and a small colony that shouldn't feel like it has the right to take swings at other colonies without just cause simply because it's smaller.
Most importantly, traders aren't going to make runs out to a distant colony for free. Sure, there are traders that will try to cut corners for the sake of making a quick credit, but they're the ones who are going to wind up stuffing little balls of fluff down the front of their tunics to make up for it. That distant colony isn't going to provide trade-goods for free, especially if it doesn't have much in the way of surplus resources. Expect things to get ugly if some transient hippies steal resources and then try to make the local colony out to be the evil one when it inevitably comes down hard on them. Like POW cryptocurrencies, if the resources exist, that means somebody spent time and effort to produce them and they deserve to be compensated for their work if the resources are used by others within the colony or sold on the open market. Anything else means slavery, worker exploitation, injustice and an inevitable revolt when blue-collar workers have had enough.
That means it's not wrong to have one or more currencies that can be conveniently used for international trade. Cryptocurrencies are in a good position to become the financial technology that is used the most for the purpose of trade between colonies with a few improvements to account for the unique environment they will be operating in.
Epilogue

I will likely have offended many people with this ebook. Bitcoin users will likely be offended by my admission that other cryptocurrencies exist and colonies can choose to use them, or not, as they wish. Some supporters of space colonization will likely be offended by my suggestion that a medium of exchange is a very handy thing to have when discussing trade between multiple independent colonies which are likely to use a wide variety of political and socioeconomic systems and have wildly different reasons for existing in the first place.
I get it; they have their favorites and they're probably going to leave an Amazon review that comes out sounding like they're defending their favorite sports team even though the team hasn't won a major championship since 1903. Right? (No, I don't have any current holdings in anything but Bitcoin as of the time of publication. Yes, I'm totally okay with you trying out your favorite socioeconomic model in your own colony as long as it's understood that you're doing it at your own risk and nobody's going to bail you out if you fail.)
For the points I wanted to make, however, the value of Bitcoin isn't that it recently soared to over $4,000 and some of the more conservative estimates show that it could go to at least $10,000 over the next few yearslxxi. Its value is that it demonstrated that a currency and associated ledger can be fully digitalized, decentralized, secure and transparent without having to make sacrifices with one or more of these four qualities. If there is any question about any given transaction, a Blockchain expert can either point at the relevant record, or point at the place where a technical glitch or attempt to hijack the ledger occurred.
These are all things that colonies that will have reached the point where they are interested in trade are going to need in a future environment that may include political structures that don't like each other very much. Three centuries from now, colonists will care about practical utility more than they do about centuries-old arguments over block size or which major cryptocurrencies are overrated altcoins.
Most importantly – and this is something that might make sense to most cryptocurrency insiders regardless of how they feel about altcoins – each colony will ultimately have to make its own decisions about what works for that particular colony regardless of what the next colony over thinks. Colonies that are close enough to the sun to make solar power viable might choose Solarcoin purely on the grounds that, if a colony can prove that it is generating solar power, then it may very well be a thriving, or at least salvageable, colony that is capable of participating in trade. It's equally valid for colonies who regularly trade with Earth to choose Earthcoin. Fighting over choice of cryptocurrencies is like fighting over which flavor of ice cream is better – not anything that would make any sense to any adult who has no stake in the outcome. The important thing is to settle on one (or a few) cryptocurrencies that is most useful for trade between colonies.

iWho's 	going to bother carding you before you can take a swig of your 	colony's moonshine anyway?

iiPeck, 	Morgen. "Bitcoins in Space!" IEEE Spectrum: Technology, 	Engineering, and Science News. IEEE, 09 Dec. 2013. Web. 02 Jan. 	2017. 	<http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/networks/bitcoins-in-space>.

iiiBitcoin 	Q&A: How Bitcoin Will Scale Gracefully, over and over Again - 	Scaling Options. Dir. Andreas M. Antopoulous. Aantonop. Youtube, 24 	May 2016. Web. 12 Sept. 2016. 	<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NMzBatr4mMk>.

ivCaffyn, 	Grace. "Chainalysis CEO Denies 'Sybil Attack' on Bitcoin's 	Network." CoinDesk. CoinDesk, 16 Mar. 2015. Web. 25 Aug. 2016. 	<http://www.coindesk.com/chainalysis-ceo-denies-launching-sybil-attack-on-bitcoin-network/>.

vGodschalk, 	Zenobia, and Leemon Baird. "Cryptocurrencies for an 	Interplanetary Economy." Message to the author. 1 Aug. 2016. 	E-mail.

viLopp, 	Jameson. "Interplanetary Cryptocurrency." Message to the 	author. 01 June 2016. E-mail.

viiBaird, 	Leemon. "Cryptocurrencies for an Interplanetary Economy." 	Message to the author. 01 June 2016. E-mail.

viiiKlees, 	Matthias. "Europecoin." Europecoin - a Lobby for a 	Decentralized Europe - EuropeCoin Crypto Lobby. Europecoin, n.d. 	Web. 02 Aug. 2016. <http://www.europecoin.eu.org/>.

ixÓðinsson, 	Baldur Fryggjar. "Auroracoin Main Page." Auroracoin. 	Auraráð, n.d. Web. 02 Jan. 2017. <http://aurarad.is/english/>.

xLennart 	Lopin, Marscoin Foundation Member. Dir. Heidi S. Hecht. Feat. 	Lennart Lopin. Lennart Lopin, Marscoin Foundation Member. Mars 	Interviews, 19 Nov. 2014. Web. 29 July 2016. 	<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iYgTKABtZGE>.

xiRumor 	has it that the three-man Skylab crews used butter cookies as a 	medium of exchange, but don't quote me on that.

xiiVogt, 	Robert. "Water Weight Conversion." Water Weight 	Conversion. Online Conversion, n.d. Web. 30 Dec. 2016. 	<http://www.onlineconversion.com/waterweight.htm>.

xiiiHarjani, 	Ansuya. "World Sees Sharp Drop in Unbanked Population: Report." 	CNBC. CNBC, 15 Apr. 2015. Web. 15 July 2016. 	<http://www.cnbc.com/2015/04/15/world-sees-massive-drop-in-unbanked-population-report.html>.

xivHilton, 	Perez. "PayPal Shuts Down Secret Santa Charity Fund To Help 	Children In Need." Perezitos RSS. Perizitos, 08 Dec. 2011. Web. 	18 July 2016. 	<http://perezhilton.com/perezitos/2011-12-08-paypal-shuts-down-secret-santa-charity-fund-to-help-children>.

xvGeary, 	Kate. "World Bank Funding a Company Implicated in Human Rights 	Abuses in Honduras." Oxfam International. Oxfam International, 	10 Jan. 2014. Web. 12 Aug. 2016. 	<https://www.oxfam.org/en/pressroom/pressreleases/2014-01-10/world-bank-funding-company-implicated-human-rights-abuses>.

xviBiron, 	Carey L. "World Bank." Inter Press Service News Agency. 	Inter Press Service News Agency, 23 July 2013. Web. 12 Aug. 2016. 	<http://www.ipsnews.net/2013/07/world-bank-falling-behind-on-human-rights-critics-warn/>.

xviiZubrin, 	Robert. Merchants of Despair: Radical Environmentalists, Criminal 	Pseudo-scientists, and the Fatal Cult .. New York City: Encounter, 	2013. Print. http://amzn.to/1O2MacI

xviii 	Hey, I added “sane” as a qualifier, didn't I?

xix"Overseas 	Filipinos' (OF) Remittances." Overseas Filipinos' (OF) 	Remittances. Bangko Sentro Ng Pilipinas, n.d. Web. 2 Jan. 2017. 	<http://www.bsp.gov.ph/Statistics/keystat/ofw.htm>.

xx"Send 	Money to the Philippines | Western Union." Western Union. 	Western Union, n.d. Web. 17 July 2016. 	<https://www.westernunion.com/us/en/send-money-to-philippines.html>.

xxiSouthurst, 	Jon. "Philippines Startups Aim to Fulfil Bitcoin's Remittance 	Promise." CoinDesk. CoinDesk, 30 July 2014. Web. 12 Aug. 2016. 	<http://www.coindesk.com/philippines-startups-fulfil-bitcoins-remittance-promise/>.

xxii"TransferWise." 	TransferWise. TansferWise, n.d. Web. 13 June 2016. 	<https://transferwise.com/us/>.

xxiiihttps://duckduckgo.com/?t=lm&q=2000+Euros+in+Bitcoin&ia=currency, 	1 BTC = 981.97 Euro on Jan. 2, 2017

xxivClark, 	Peter. "Overstock To Pay Its Employees in Bitcoin." 	Bitcoin Vox. Bitcoin Vox, 02 Aug. 2014. Web. 08 Aug. 2016. 	<http://bitcoinvox.com/article/898/overstock-to-pay-its-employees-in-bitcoin>.

xxvValenzuela, 	Joël. "Largest Swedish Gold Dealer Has Bank Accounts Closed: 	Time for Bitcoin?" CoinTelegraph. CoinTelegraph, 11 July 2016. 	Web. 03 Aug. 2016. 	<http://cointelegraph.com/news/largest-swedish-gold-dealer-has-bank-accounts-closed-time-for-bitcoin>.

xxviNarayanan, 	Arvind. "Analyzing the 2013 Bitcoin Fork: Centralized 	Decision-making Saved the Day." Freedom to Tinker. Freedom to 	Tinker, 28 July 2015. Web. 03 Aug. 2016. 	<https://freedom-to-tinker.com/blog/randomwalker/analyzing-the-2013-bitcoin-fork-centralized-decision-making-saved-the-day/>.

xxviiSmith, 	Peter, Ben Reeves, and Nicholas Cary. "Welcome to Blockchain" 	Bitcoin Block Explorer - Blockchain. The Bitcoin Blockchain, 01 Jan. 	2009. Web. 03 July 2016. <https://blockchain.info/>.

xxviiiOberhauser, 	Alex. "Blockchain Protocol Series - Introduction." 	Networld R&D Blog. Network R&D Blog, 24 May 2015. Web. 13 	Aug. 2016. 	<https://blog.networld.to/1330/blockchain-protocol-series%E2%80%8A-%E2%80%8Aintroduction>.

xxixTyler, 	Taylor. "Bitcoin Wedding: Marriage on the Blockchain." 	CryptoCoinsNews. CryptoCoinsNews, 24 Sept. 2014. Web. 14 Aug. 2016. 	<https://www.cryptocoinsnews.com/bitcoin-wedding-marriage-on-the-blockchain/>.

xxxAllison, 	Ian. "Bitnation and Estonian Government Start Spreading 	Sovereign Jurisdiction on the Blockchain." International 	Business Times UK. International Business Times, 08 Feb. 2016. Web. 	20 July 2016. 	<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/bitnation-estonian-government-start-spreading-sovereign-jurisdiction-blockchain-1530923>.

xxxiChan, 	Ming, Vitalik Buterin, and Jeffrey Wilcke. "Ethereum Project." 	Ethereum Project. Ethereum Foundation, Nov. 2013. Web. 03 Jan. 2017. 	<https://www.ethereum.org/>.

xxxiiPeterson, 	Jack, and Joey Krug. "Decentralized Prediction Market | Augur 	Project." Augur | Decentralized Prediction Markets. Augur, n.d. 	Web. 12 July 2016. <https://www.augur.net/>.

xxxiiiJentzsch, 	Simon, Christoph Jentzsch, and Stephan Tual. "Slock.it." 	Slock.it. Slock.it, n.d. Web. 12 July 2016. <https://slock.it/>.

xxxivDodson, 	Nick. "About BoardRoom." BoardRoom | Blockchain Governance 	Suite. BoardRoom, n.d. Web. 04 Aug. 2016. <http://boardroom.to/>.

xxxv"Bitcoins 	For Charity." Bitcoins For Charity. Bitcoins For Charity, n.d. 	Web. 03 Jan. 2017. <http://bitcoinsforcharity.org/charities>.

xxxvi 	“Mint In Box” is the term collectors use to describe the 	condition of an item that is in pristine shape, but the box it came 	in looks like it got run over by a Mack truck.

xxxviiLevy, 	Daniele, Adán Sánchez De Pedro, and Tommaso Prennushi. "Leaders 	in Blockchain-Based Data Certification." Stampery. Stampery, 	n.d. Web. 04 Aug. 2016. <https://stampery.com/>.

xxxviiiStampery.co. 	"Can Blockchain Technology Send Notaries on Vacation... For 	Good?" Medium. Medium, 06 Nov. 2015. Web. 10 Aug. 2016. 	<https://medium.com/@Stampery/can-blockchain-technology-send-notaries-on-vacation-for-good-4b99df14de7d#.1tnqae453>.

xxxixToo, 	Belinda. "Couple to Get Married on the Bitcoin Blockchain at 	Disney Bitcoin Conference."Bitcoin ATM - Coinoutlet. Coinoutlet 	Bitcoin ATM, 04 Feb. 2015. Web. 05 Aug. 2016. 	<http://coinoutletatm.com/couple-to-get-married-on-the-bitcoin-blockchain-at-disney-bitcoin-conference-2/>.

xl"Over 	8% of Medical Devices in Circulation Are Counterfeit: WHO." News 	Medical. News Medical Life Sciences, 06 Jan. 2013. Web. 20 Jan. 	2017. 	<http://www.news-medical.net/news/20100128/Over-825-of-medical-devices-in-circulation-are-counterfeit-WHO.aspx>.

xliBaker, 	Jessi. "Every Product Has a Story." Provenance. 	Provenance, n.d. Web. 10 July 2016. <https://www.provenance.org/>.

xliiDillon, 	Alison. "Cup Above Tea." Cup Above Tea. Cup Above Tea, 	2013. Web. 13 Aug. 2016. <https://www.cupabovetea.com/>.

xliiiZubrin, 	Robert. How to Live on Mars: A Trusty Guidebook to Surviving and 	Thriving on the Red Planet. New York: Three Rivers, 2008. Print. 	http://amzn.to/1PFNgf0

xliv"BITNATION 	World Citizenship ID v. 0.2." BITNATION. BITNATION, 27 Feb. 	2016. Web. 03 Jan. 2017. 	<https://bitnation.co/world-citizenship-id/>.

xlvGrush, 	Loren. "Elon Musk Thinks the Best Government for Mars Is a 	Direct Democracy." The Verge. The Verge, 02 June 2016. Web. 13 	July 2016. 	<http://www.theverge.com/2016/6/2/11837590/elon-musk-mars-government-direct-democracy-law-code-conference>.

xlviOberhauser, 	Alex. "Finance as a Service." Networld R&D Blog. 	Networld R&D, 25 Jan. 2015. Web. 13 July 2016. 	<https://blog.networld.to/1090/finance-service-linkedin-post>.

xlviiColeman, 	Lester. "Overstock Blockchain Securities Platform Presses 	Onward, with Some Questions Raised." CryptoCoinsNews. 	CryptoCoinsNews, 12 Jan. 2016. Web. 25 June 2016. 	<https://www.cryptocoinsnews.com/overstock-blockchain-securities-platform-presses-onward-questions-raised/>.

xlviii"Voting." 	Nxt. NXT, n.d. Web. 20 June 2016. 	<https://nxt.org/what-is-nxt/voting/>.

xlixConnell, 	Justin. "Why Bitcoin Is Close to a Record-Breaking 3 Exahashes 	Of Processing Power."Bitcoin News. Bitcoin News, 16 Jan. 2017. 	Web. 17 Jan. 2017. 	<https://news.bitcoin.com/why-bitcoin-is-close-to-a-record-breaking-3-exahashes-processing-power/>.

lThere's 	a computer geek out there going, “Holy shit, really?!” But for 	the rest of us, an exahash equals 1 X 1018 	calculations per second. That's more computing power than every 	single supercomputer in existence.

li"Scrypt." 	Smith + Crown. Smith + Crown, n.d. Web. 3 Jan. 2017. 	<https://newschain.net/cryptocurrency/proof-work-cryptocurrencies-brief-history>.

lii"Monero 	- Secure, Private, Untraceable." The Monero Project. The Monero 	Project, n.d. Web. 03 July 2016. <https://getmonero.org/home>.

liiiKiraly, 	Balazs, and Tungfa. "X11 - Official Documentation." 	Confluence. Monero, n.d. Web. 03 Jan. 2017. 	<https://dashpay.atlassian.net/wiki/display/DOC/X11>.

liv"About 	Our Cryptocurrency." Groestlcoin. The Groestlcoin Team, n.d. 	Web. 03 Jan. 2017. <http://www.groestlcoin.org/about-groestlcoin/>.

lv 	Baird, Leemon, and Mance Harmon. "Home." Swirlds. The 	Swirlds Team, n.d. Web. 03 July 2016. <http://www.swirlds.com/ 	>.

lviThe 	Solarcoin Team. "SolarCoin." SolarCoin. The Solarcoin 	Team, n.d. Web. 03 Aug. 2016. <http://solarcoin.org/en/front-page/>.

lviiThe 	Storj Team. "Storj - Decentralized Cloud Storage." Storj - 	Decentralized Cloud Storage. The Storj Team, n.d. Web. 03 July 2016. 	<https://storj.io/>.

lviiiThe 	Blockchain.info Team. "Blockchain Size." Blockchain.info. 	N.p., n.d. Web. 03 Jan. 2017. 	<https://blockchain.info/charts/blocks-size>.

lix 	Amazon. "Amazon Search Results." Amazon.com: 8tb External 	Hard Drive. Amazon, n.d. Web. 4 June 2016. <http://amzn.to/1ssVqwG>.

lx"Money." 	Mirriam-Webster. Mirriam-Webster, n.d. Web. 3 Jan. 2017. 	<http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/money>.

lxi 	Congresswoman Cynthia McKinney. Dir. Heidi Hecht. Feat. 	Congresswoman Cynthia McKinney. Youtube. Heidi Hecht, 09 June 2016. 	Web. 09 June 2016. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ru0QmM015u0>.

lxiiAnd 	you can argue all you want about property rights, but your colony 	won't appreciate you taking more than your fair share of the 	greenhouse produce without earning it. Starvation and colonial 	collapse happen when people get that greedy and lazy.

lxiiiRosenblatt, 	Joshua S. "Cryptocurrencies for an Interplanetary Economy." 	Message to the author. 1 July 2016. E-mail.

lxiv 	"The United States and the ICJ." Council on Foreign 	Relations. Council on Foreign Relations, 27 Dec. 2011. Web. 23 June 	2016. 	<http://www.cfr.org/courts-and-tribunals/united-states-icj/p26905>.

lxvThe 	SolarCity Team. "SolarCity - A Cleaner, More Affordable 	Alternative to Your Utility Bill."SolarCity - A Cleaner, More 	Affordable Alternative to Your Utility Bill. The SolarCity Team, 	n.d. Web. 03 July 2016. 	<http://share.solarcity.com/blockchainspaceheidi>.

lxvi"Helium." 	Lunarpedia. Lunarpedia, n.d. Web. 13 June 2016. 	<http://www.lunarpedia.org/index.php?title=Helium#Value_of_Lunar_Helium_3_in_Today.27s_Market>.

lxvii 	"Ancient Aliens Meme." WeKnowMemes. We Know Memes, 14 Dec. 	2012. Web. 03 Jan. 2017. 	<http://weknowmemes.com/2011/09/ancient-aliens-meme/>.

lxviii 	"History of Computers and Computing, Mechanical Calculators, 	18th Century, Johann Müller. "History of Computers and 	Computing. History of Computers and Computing, n.d. Web. 23 June 	2016. 	<http://history-computer.com/MechanicalCalculators/18thCentury/Muller.html>.

lxix 	Holt, Nathalia. Rise of the Rocket Girls: The Women Who Propelled 	Us, from Missiles to the Moon to Mars. New York: Little, Brown, 	2016. Print. http://amzn.to/28SUtc4

lxx 	Zubrin, Robert @robert_zubrin. “Tweet Message.” 6:17 PM, 19 Dec. 	2016. Tweet.

lxxi 	Wilson, Greg. "Three Reasons Why Bitcoin Could Reach $10,000 	(Or More)." Casey Research. N.p., 28 Mar. 2017. Web. 31 Mar. 	2017. 	<https://www.caseyresearch.com/articles/three-reasons-why-bitcoin-could-reach-10000-or-more>
